
                    ÚÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ¿
                    ³  Mattel Electronics Intellivision  ³
                    ³       Intelligent Television       ³
                    ÀÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÙ



             ÛÛ
             Û          "Mattel Electronics Presents"
         ÛÛÛÛÛÛ
         Û ÛÛÛ
         Û ÛÛÛÛÛ            ÚÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ¿
           ÛÛ               ³De Re Intellivision³
                            ÀÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÙ
           ÛÛ
          ÛÛÛÛÛÛ     (In Latin "All About Intellivision")
          ÛÛÛÛÛÛ
          Û    Û
         ÛÛ    Û       Compilation By William M. Moeller
         ÛÛ    Û
        ÛÛ
        Û

ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
                     Last Modified November 28, 1997
                    ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ

                               Chapter I

                        "Intellivision History"



                             Foreword
                            ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ

The Mattel Electronics Intellivision in the early 1980's was one of the
most popular video game systems in the world. Despite being a huge success
in its own right, the Intellivision never quite sold as well as the more
popular Atari Video Computer System and its clones.

Each Intellivision had copyrighted software in it, unlike the Atari VCS
which utilized off the shelf parts. As a consequence, no unauthorized clones
of the Intellivision ever appeared. Utilizing a 16 bit microprocessor, even
the ROMS were a "non standard" 10 bits wide.

This fact made it very difficult to know what made it tick. There was
very little documentation detailing how the system worked. Companies
such as IMAGIC who reversed engineered the Intellivision and documented
the internal Executive Rom made quite an investment to find out how it
worked. The chip set in the Intellivision was not a popular one, and not
used in very many other devices. Therefore, very few people knew anything
about the heart of the Intellivision, the General Instruments CP1610.

When Carl Mueller decided he wanted to make an Intellivision emulator for
the IBM PC, he faced a daunting task. No one seemed to be able to dump even
ONE game cartridge for the system. Eventually, he did find two, and began
to piece together a program to run the said Intellivision cartridges. When
I saw this program, I was amazed. With only some technical overviews and a
listing of the OP codes he obtained from an Osborne book, here was the actual
code of an Intellivision game being executed on a PC!

Carl however, had a problem. He had only two cart dumps, and lacked the
Executive code. Without this code, he had to literally GUESS what each
program was doing when it made a call to the Executive program. Being a
software person, he needed help getting dumps of game programs and
both the Executive and Graphic Roms. Without the Executive and Graphic
Roms, development of the Intellivision emulator would soon come to a
screeching halt!

This is where I came in. Since I knew a very talented programmer by the
name of Scott Nudds, I asked him about dumping the Executive Rom. He
claimed this would be "trivial". I asked him to prove it!

A trip to the library resulted in an Osborne book chapter dealing with the
General Instrument CP1600. Some time later, Scott made good upon his claim
and designed, built and programmed a GI Rom reader. By delivering the Exec,
numerous game programs and Graphic Rom, development continued on the
emulator. As information was collected for the purpose of dumping Intellivision
Roms and the programming of the emulator, it was decided to collect this
information in one document. This Book is the result.

De Re Intellivision means simply "All about Intellivision". It was my
intention to gather into one document everything I could locate about the
Mattel Intellivision and its peripherals. This includes its history,
information on game programs and the programmers, programming information,
hardware information, repairs/modifications, and collecting guide.
Simply "EVERYTHING" there is to know about the Intellivision!

It is hoped that the technical information included in this document will
enable the continuation of development of games and/or hardware for the
Mattel Electronics Intellivision.

Much of this information was collected verbatim from various souces
(many on line). This file has been assembled from components from
various Intellivision text files as well as new information from direct
experimentation.

Documentation on the construction and programming of the Cart reader are
also found in this package, however, this chapter will be made available
AFTER the Intellivision CD ROM is released.

Many people have made the revival of the Mattel Intellivision possible.
I would like to thank everyone who has contributed to this document knowingly
or not. However, I would like to especially thank first of all, Carl Mueller
who has written an extrodinary emulator. It was an honour to have been
involved with his project. Scott Nudds, who was pivotal in providing Carl
with technical information. Ron Carlson, the designer of the Intellivoice
for providing technical information. Gary Kato, formerly from Imagic, who
provided me with information on Intellivision development there. And,
finally, I would like to thank the "Blue Sky Rangers" for bringing me all
the wonderful games I remember playing as a youth.

William M. Moeller

Hamilton, Ontario, Canada



Intellivision History ÃÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÙ


Intellivision Master Component Graphic³
ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÙ

         ÚÄÄÄ Power Cable          ÚÄÄÄÄ RF Cable
                                  
  ÚÄÄÄÄÄÁÄÁÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÁÄÁÄÄÄÄ¿
  ³ ÚÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ¿ ³  Channel Selector On bottom.
  ³ ³                                  ³ ³
  ³ ÀÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÙ ³
  ³ ÚÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÂÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÂÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ¿ ³  Ä¿
  ³ ³ÚÄÄ¿... ³ ÚÂÂÂÂÂ¿ ÚÂÂÂÂ¿ ³ ...ÚÄÄ¿³ ³    ³
  ³ ³³  ³... ³ ÃÅÅÅÅÅ´ ÃÅÅÅÅ´ ³ ...³  ³³ ³    ÃÄÄ Cart Slot
  ³ ³ÀÄÄÙ... ³ ÀÁÁÁÁÁÙ ÀÁÁÁÁÙ ³ ...ÀÄÄÙ³ ³    ³
  ³ ÀÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÁÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÁÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÙ ³  ÄÙ
  ³ ÚÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ¿ ³
  ³ ³ Mattel Electronics Intellivision ³ ³
  ³ ÀÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ[] []ÄÙ ³
  ÀÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÙ
                                    
                                  ³  ÀÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ  Power Switch
                                  ÀÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ  Reset Switch




Intellivision Master Component #2609 Development History ³
ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÙ

In 1976, the head of Mattel Toys Design and Development department,
Richard Chang, hired a small Pasadena, California company called APh
Technology Consultants to investigate the possiblity of producing a home
video game system.

In the General Instruments integrated circuit catalogue, they discovered
a video game system called the Gimini 6900 which could be assembled from
off-the-shelf GI chips. Unfortunately, the design of the Gimini 6900
only allowed for a Read Only Memory chip which would contain graphics
that would be used for every game. APh artist Dave James insisted this
limitation would criple the new video game system. (Dave James was later
responsible for much of the Intellivision's on screen look, including the
famous running man animation used in many of the Intellivision's Sports
titles.)

General Instrument, however, was excited about the possiblity of Mattel
producing a video game system based on their chips, and helped make design
changes which would allow a way for programmers to define new graphics for
each new game.

The original General Instruments off-the-shelf design included the 2K
system ROM that would contain the operating system for the unit. A
change, proposed by either APh or Mattel, was to include an additional
ROM, with a 2K library of common subroutines the programmers could
utilize. These subroutines included such things as a random number generator,
scoring routines and frequently used sound effects. Together, this 4k of
code was to be known as the Executive.

Ultimately, the Executive program was slightly larger than 4K and had to
overflow partially into the Graphic ROM, which contains the library of
commonly used graphics from which every game can draw from. These changes
resulted in a very sloppy, but functionally superior design.

Despite the changes being made to the Ginini 6900 design, Mattel executives
were still reluctant to compete with Atari in the video game business. They
put the video game project on hold, and instead began to move into hand
held electronic games. Many of these hand held games, marketed under the
name "Mattel Electronics", were programmed by APh.

By 1978, these games had become very successful and once again the idea of
marketing a video game system was being pushed. Upper Management of Mattel
was finally sold on the idea by executive Jeff Rochliss, and the Intellivision
project began to move forward once again.

The physical design of the Intellivision hardware including the infamous
hand controllers was done at Mattel by a team headed by Dave Chandler.
This work earned him the nickname "Papa Intellivision". As mentioned
previously, APh programmed the internal software dubbed the "Executive".

The original Intellivision was a stylish molded brown plastic, with a woodgrain
trim. The hand controllers stored on both ends and the top sported a gold
trim with a Painted Intellivision logo on it. A very attractive unit,
and very high tech looking for the time. The final Intellivision product
had a very high quality feel to it. The unit felt substantial in your hands
and appeared to be well built. Even the game boxes opened like a book.
The game program manuals were full colour, and each game included colourful
overlays. (Ed. I even vaguely recall getting a felt tipped pen included to
fill out the registration card)

While this work was going on, Texas Instruments contacted Mattel and
pushed hard to get them to use TI chips in the Intellivision. Despite
being offered an excellent price, Mattel stuck with GI chips as it would
have caused a six to nine month delay in the development. APh's president
Glenn Hightower fought against the TI chip set as he felt it was inferior
to the GI chip set.

The first Intellivison games were designed by Glenn Hightower, APh's
president, and programmed by graduates and students of nearby California
Institute of Technology. APh is in fact, an abreviation of Applied Physics
from CalTech's course catalogue.

One of the first programmable video game systems was the Odyssey, produced
by Magnavox. With the Odyssey they had in fact, patented the concept of
a programmable home video game system. When Atari released their Video
Computer System, they obtained a license from Magnavox for a very low
price. However, by the time the Intellivision was released, Atari was
hugely sucessful. Magnavox realizing their mistake, demanded a large sum
for each Master Component sold. Mattel lawyers refused to pay, believing
the patent would never stand up in court. Unfortunately for Mattel,
Magnavox sued and won, and Mattel ended up paying them a few million
dollars.

The Intellivision, along with Poker & Blackjack, Math Fun, Armor Battle
and Backgammon were successfuly test marketed in 1979 in Fresno, California
and went into wide release in 1980. An impressive computer keyboard add-on
was also promised for release in 1981. With APh producing all Intellivision's
programs, Mattel began to hire programmers. However, Mattel at that time,
did not even have the facilities to produce video games. The first Mattel
based Intellivision programmers had to commute to APh in Pasadena. The first
Non-APh release was Bowling, adding to the Intellivision's already
impressive Sports Network.

The Intellivision was immediately successful. In 1980, the production run
of 175,000 Master Components completely sold out. Many people preferred
the superior graphics of the Intellivision, but disliked the hand
controllers. The Intellivision was also more expensive than its main
competitor, the Atari Video Computer System. Despite many people wishing
the Intellivision had a joystick controller instead of a disc, the
Intellivision controllers actually lent themselves well to sports games.
Intellivision had a means to input complex plays, and control individual
game components. Two of the most popular sports titles, Baseball and
Football used the keypads exstensively. Baseball for the Intellivision
is still remembered well to this day, by millions of fans.

George Plimpton, a famous sports personality was hired to advertise
Intellivision on television. Side by side comparisons of Atari sports
games were made. Atari versus Mattel became just as common as Coke
versus Pepsi. Mattel became famous for their Sports conversions.
By 1982, George Plimpton was featuring Space games in his commercials.
No doubt these commercials ate into profits quite substantially. However,
on a positive note, Intellivision became a household word in the early 1980's.

As this advertizing war raged, the Intellivision seemed to lose the emphasis
on "Intelligent Television". The Keyboard component was continually delayed.
The problem? The Keyboard Component was supposed to be an "inexpensive" add
on to the Intellivision system. Unfortunately, the Keyboard component was
hoplessly expensive. The Keyboard was only sold in test markets but never
made it into wide release.

A voice add-on module called the Intellivoice was introduced late in 1981.
Ultimately, five voice compatible cartridges were released. The Intellivoice
was not very successful because consumers liked the idea of voice games, but
not the fact that one had to purchase an expensive add-on.

Also, 1981 saw a joint venture with General Instruments and Mattel produce
a device known as "Play Cable". This Intellivision add on, styled on the
original Master Component, allowed Intellivision games to be broadcast
by cable companies, providing users with new games on a rotating basis.

Mattel began to concentrate less on educational programs such as those in the
"Childrens Network" and more on video games. In fact, with this new marketing
thrust, the Network concept for cartidges was discontinued after 1982.

During 1982, the Intellivision was redesigned and the original Master Component
was fazed out of production with the introduction of the Intellivision II.
The Intellivision II did not have as high production quality as the original
Master Component. This was the beginning of the decline of the high quality
standards which were seen in the original Master Component and other
Intellivision products. Declines in workmanship included omitting the
sheilding built into every cartridge, making the Intellivison "book" boxes
into normal boxes, getting rid of the plastic cartridge tray and not
printing the instruction booklets in colour.

By 1983, the industry began to have serious problems. Known to video game
fans as the "Great Video Game Crash", 1983 saw Mattel, Atari and Coleco
all decimated with huge loses. The problem was simply more supply than demand.
The Entertainment Computer System, a Keyboard Component replacement, was
quietly released in 1983 with little or no marketing push. The ECS was only
released in response to U.S. Federal Trade Comission complaints about the
original, never released Keyboard Component.

By summer 1983, Mattel had laid off all employees involved in hardware
development. In the fall, another round of layoffs affected programmers.
Unfortunately, by January 1984, it was all over. Mattel Electronics went
belly up, and so it seemed, took the entire Intellivision product line
with it.

Terry Valeski, however, had different ideas. Valeski and a group of investors
bought all the remaining stock and the rights to all the Intellivision
product line. Known as Intellivision Incorporated, they began to sell off
the remaining stock of Intellivision games, and to sell games which had been
ready for release right before Mattel Electronics demise.

By the end of November 1984, Valeski bought out the other investors and
changed the name of the Corporation to INTV Corporation. Thus began a
new chapter in the life of the original Master Component. INTV re-released
the original Master Component with some minor cosmetic changes. Dubbed the
Intellivision System III, and later INTV Super Pro System, the Intellivision
continued to be manufactured and sold through mail order, and stores such
as Toys R Us. Despite having a different model number, the "Super Pro System"
from INTV returned the Intellivision product line to its roots, selling a
black and silver, original style Master Component.

INTV continued to sell Master Components and cartridges, as well as to hire
former Mattel Electronics empolyees to continue developing games. Surprisingly,
INTV Corporation kept the Intellivision name alive until 1990. Having run out
of money, INTV Corporation failed to sucessfully make the jump from
exclusively supporting the Intellivision, to developing for the incredibly
successful Nintendo Entertainment System, and went bankrupt some time in 1991.

"Intelligent Television" however, had almost killed Mattel. In the aftermath
of the demise of Mattel Electronics, Mattel began to rebuild its company.
After finding new investors, and divesting themselves of all but their
core toy business, they relocated from their long-time headquarters in
Hawthorne to El Segundo, California. Today, they are once again, one of
the strongest companies in the toy industry, with $3 billion in annual
sales. Despite the video game industry staging a comeback, Mattel is
reluctant to enter this volitile market. Mattel President Jill Barad
recently told Forbes magazine with regards to the video game market:
"I'm watching it, and I want to be there. But I want to be there
appropriately and correctly."

APh Technology Consultants, having many non-video game contracts,
sucessfully survived the "Great Video Game Crash" of 1983. Today, they
are still at their same location, programming processors in everything
from spacecraft to consumer electronics.

The Mattel Electronics Intellivision today is still remembered fondly by
many people. The original Master Component, along with the Intellivision II,
Sears, Radio Shack, Sylvania and INTV clones ultimately sold about three
million units. With the possible release of new games very soon, perhaps
the story of the Mattel Electronics Intellivision is not quite over!
                                                              

Intellivision II Master Component #5872 Development History ³
ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÙ
                                        
Mattel Intellivision II Master Component Graphic³
ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÙ

                    ÚÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ Channel Selector Switch
   ÚÄÄ RF Cable     ³ ÚÄÄÄÄÄÄ Power
                    
  ÉÊÍÍÍÍÍÍÍÍÍÍÍÍÍÍÍÍÊÍÊÍÍÍÍÍÍÍÍ»
  º ÚÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ¿ÚÄÄÄÄÄÄ¿ÚÄÄÄÄÄÄ¿ º
  º ³ğğğğğğğ ³³ ÚÄÄ¿ ³³ ÚÄÄ¿ ³ º
  º ³ğğğğğğğ ³³ ³..³ ³³ ³..³ ³ º  Ä¿
  º ³ğğğğğğğ ³³ ³..³ ³³ ³..³ ³ º    ÃÄÄ Cart Slot
  º ³        ³³ ÀÄÄÙ ³³ ÀÄÄÙ ³ º    ³
  º ³ ÚÄÄ¿   ³³ ÚÄÄ¿ ³³ ÚÄÄ¿ ³ º  ÄÙ
  º ³ ÀÄÄÙ o Ã´ ÀÄÄÙ Ã´ ÀÄÄÙ ³ º
  º ÀÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÁÁÄÄÄÄÄÄÁÁÄÄÄÄÄÄÙ º
  ÈÍÍÍÍÍÍÍÍÍÍÍÍÍÍÍÍÍÍÍÍÍÍÍÍÍÍÍÍ¼
        
      ³  ÀÄÄÄÄÄÄ Power Led
      ÀÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ Power/Reset switch
                          

   The Intellivision Master Component got a make over in 1982.
   The Intellivision II was smaller and lighter than the original
   Master Componenet. It was a light grey accented with a black and
   silver face plate. Earlier models of the Intellivision II sported
   a red strip around the base of the unit. The new Master Component
   was developed under the code name "Big Mac", and its design achieved
   three main goals.

   The first goal was to reduce cost. This goal was realized by redesigning
   the circuitry which lowered the number of components in each Master
   Component. The Intellivision II also omitted the metal sheilding which
   was soldered over the motherboard of the original model.

   The second goal was to allow the parts most prone to failure, the power
   supply and the hand controllers to plug in.

   The final goal of the Intellivision redesign was to add an external video
   input. This input allowed the System Changer to be sold as an add on to
   the Intellivision. The System Changer was a device which allowed Atari
   2600 Video Computer System games to be used with the Intellivision. The
   System Changer was in fact, an actual Atari 2600 clone without its own
   power supply and video output. The Intellivision System Changer did not
   "emulate" an Atari, but actually WAS an Atari.

   The reason behind the System Changer was purely marketing. Mattel wanted
   to claim that the Intellivision system had the most games available.
   Allowing access to the Video Computer System library made this claim
   possible. The original Master Component, which lacked an external video
   output, could only utilize the System Changer with an internal factory
   modification.

   When the Intellivision II hit the market, it was soon discovered that the
   three Coleco Intellivision games on the market did not work with the new
   unit. Mattel claimed it was not sure why this was, suggesting that perhaps
   software changes needed for the System Changer were responsible.

   However, the truth was that Mattel KNEW why the Coleco games did not
   work with the Intellivision II. The Intellivision II was designed NOT
   to work with these games!

   How this was done was by modifying the internal software in each
   Intellivision. This software, known as the EXEC, contains a subroutine
   which displays the Mattel Copyright notice. This routine has a memory
   location for the copyright year. In the Intellivision II, the EXEC
   program was modifyed to halt if this location did not have a valid date!
   This tactic effectively rendered the then current Coleco games useless!
   In addition, a Mattel game which bypassed this routine, "Word Fun" was
   also rendered inoperative on the new Intellivision. Obviously it was
   more important to the Mattel executives to hurt the Coleco sales
   than to have the Intellivision II work with all of Mattel's own games!

   As games at Mattel went from the original 4k size to 8k and larger, many
   programmers began to bypass the Executive Copyright Routine replacing it
   with their own custom screens. This situation led them to be informed
   about the requirement to set the copyright bit in order for their games
   to work on an Intellivision II. This was done on a "one to one" "need
   to know" basis. The reason for this secrecy was that Mattel made a
   deliberite attempt to render the competitions software useless, and may
   have been illegal! However, shortly after the Intellivision II was
   released, third party developers were able to discover how to make their
   cartridges work on it.

   Unfortunately for Intellivision II owners, this change in the Executive
   program introduced a slight timing difference with the original Master
   Component. Minor sound effect troubles began showing up. Two already
   released games, Shark! Shark! and Space Spartans were affected by these
   changes to the Executive. The later release of Super Pro Football by
   INTV Corporation had the biggest error related to the new Exec. The
   Quarterback does not appear on the screen until AFTER the ball was
   hiked. An errata had to be placed in each Super Pro Football sold.
   Obviously many programmers ignored these subtle changes to the EXEC!



Intellivision III Master Component [UNRELEASED] Development HistoryÃÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÙ

   When Intellivision was introduced, Mattel's marketing positioned it
   as the cornerstone of a home computer system, implying that while the
   Atari VCS (2600) was a toy, the Intellivision -- Intelligent
   Television -- was an educational tool. After its release though,
   Marketing discovered that most people who chose Intellivision over
   Atari did so because of better graphics. Educational games and the
   Keyboard Component were dropped in priority and the focus shifted
   to exploiting the graphics with a series of commercials showing
   side-by-side comparisons of Intellivision and Atari games.

           This backfired when Colecovision was introduced in early 1982.
   Suddenly, Intellivision was no longer the superior graphics system.
   Atari tried to compete with the introduction of the Atari 5200, but
   consumers were disappointed it couldn't play Atari 2600 cartridges.

   Marketing decided that the only way for Mattel to respond was to
   introduce a new game machine -- Intellivision III -- that had graphics
   as good or better than Colecovision and could still play all the
   original Intellivision cartridges.

   The solution to this was actually fairly simple since the
   Intellivision contains a separate video processor, the STIC chip.
   Mattel commissioned General Instruments to build an improved STIC for
   the Intellivision III. This new Super-STIC (STIC 1B) would have a
   double-resolution background mode and allow for more moving objects
   (sprites) and colors, but otherwise would be compatible with the
   original STIC. By having the Intellivision III based on the same
   CP1610 processor as in the original Intellivision, the old games
   would still run, and new games could take advantage of the improved
   graphics features.

   General Instruments prototyped the Super-STIC, Design & Development
   modified an Intellivision to use it, and APh Technology
   Consultants began writing the expanded EXEC program to control it.
   The project was code named Coffee.

   Had that been the extent of it--an Intellivision with a new STIC chip,
   expanded EXEC ROM and some extra RAM (to keep track of all those
   moving objects) -- the product probably could have hit the market
   fairly fast. Unfortunately, Intellivision III fell victim to Kitchen
   Sink Syndrome, as in Everything-But-The.

   While Intellivision III was in development, Intellivoice hit the
   market. Consumers liked the concept of talking games, but they didn't
   like that they had to buy an add-on module. Sales were sluggish. To
   save the voice program (which represented quite an investment), it was
   decided to incorporate Intellivoice into the Intellivision III.

   Now, the Intellivoice contains a buffer chip to interface the
   speech processor with the Intellivision CP1610; it was
   designed so that other peripherals could also interface with the
   CP1610 through this buffer chip. On the drawing board at the time:
   wireless hand controllers. Since the buffer chip would have to be
   built into the Intellivision III, it was decided to add the (as yet
   undeveloped) wireless hand controllers, too.

   Of course, if you're going to double the graphic resolution, you
   really should double the audio quality, so an extra sound chip was
   added to the design. And, since the input ports of the Intellivision
   sound chip are used for the hand controller inputs, that meant you
   could add two more hand controllers to the Intellivision III and
   design 4-player games.

   All of these extra features meant the new EXEC had to be even more
   complex to control everything. Not only that, but the Intellivision
   programmers wanted to see frequently-used subroutines, such as screen
   scrolling, added to the EXEC instead of having them use up precious
   game cartridge space. Ray Kaestner (Burgertime) was sent to APh to
   represent the Mattel Electronics programmers during the development of
   the new EXEC.

   These expanded design features were grafted on one at a time over
   several months, causing a lot of rework and frustration and delays.

   In private rooms in the Mattel Electronics booth at the June 1982
   Consumer Electronics Show (CES) in Chicago, major toy buyers were told
   of the upcoming improved Intellivision to bolster their faith in the
   product line. At the January CES in Las Vegas, they were told, they
   would see the working system. But by January 1983, Intellivision III
   still hadn't progressed beyond the preliminary breadboard stage in the
   Design & Development lab.

   So if it never left the lab, what were the toy buyers looking at in
   the private rooms of Mattel's booth at the January CES? Not a
   prototype Intellivision III as they thought. They were looking at a
   plain old Intellivision displaying some really good graphics.

   Six cartridges were shown; two were supposedly games in progress, the
   other four demonstrated enhanced features of Intellivision III. The
   nearest thing to a real technical advancement in these cartridges was
   that they contained up to 16K of memory. Since they were all graphics,
   special effects and music (by Bill Goodrich) and no game play, they
   could be a lot flashier than the then common 4K real game cartridges.

   The two "games in progress," shown with printed packaging,
   were Treasure of the Yucatan and Grid Shock. The first was a static
   picture of a stone idol overgrown with jungle vines. An impressive,
   complex screen, it had been done a year earlier by Eric Wels (Mr.
   Color) when he was first hired, simply to learn how Intellivision
   graphics worked. The screen eventually found it way into Bill
   Goodrich's D&D voice game, Quest.

   Grid Shock was the beginnings of an actual game by Andy Sells. A wall
   that swept back and forth across the playing field, changing
   perspective as it moved, gave the screen a strong 3-D feel. Grid Shock
   had been abandoned by Andy since he was spending so much time doing
   sound effects and music for other games (e.g. Shark! Shark! and
   TRON Solar Sailer), but what was complete was visually interesting
   enough to pass as Intellivision III.

   The other cartridges, written by Ray Kaestner and programmers at APh,
   used sleight-of-hand to demonstrate Intellivision III features --
   multiplexing moving objects put more than the normal limit of
   eight on screen at one time (albeit flickering); updating moving
   object positions every 1/60 of a second instead of the EXEC's
   normal 1/20 gave the illusion of smoother, faster motion.

   So what games were really in development for the Intellivision III?
   Well, none. Since both systems were CP1610-based, it was decided to
   just keep writing for the Intellivision. Then, when (and if) the
   features and release date of Intellivision III were finalized, any
   Intellivision games nearing completion would be quickly upgraded for
   the new system by tossing in fancy graphics and sounds. In October
   1982 for a meeting with Marketing and distributors, Gabriel Baum, VP
   of Application Software, listed the likely candidates to be released
   as Intellivision III games: the then-in-development Basketball II,
   Mission X, Thin Ice, Air Battle and Mystic Castle; proposed Winter
   Olympics and Dungeons & Dragons cartridges; and a to-be-determined
   children's title using one of the newly acquired licensed characters.

   But no upgrading was ever needed, because in mid-1983 Intellivision
   III was killed, done in by the delays. Retailers saw it as too little,
   too late to compete with the then year-old Colecovision. And with the
   Aquarius Home Computer System and the Intellivision
   Entertainment Computer System (ECS), there was already a glut of
   hardware in the 1983 pipeline. With Mattel Electronics starting to
   pile up hundreds of millions of dollars in losses, it was announced
   that Intellivision III was being canceled, officially because most of
   its features had been incorporated into the ECS. (A bogus claim; the
   extra sound chip and hand-controller ports are the only features they
   share.) The last hope for the future of Intellivision now rested with
   the top-secret project code-named Decade: Intellivision IV.

   NOTE: The Intellivision III should not be confused with the INTV
   System III, which was simply INTV Corporation's re-release of the
   original Intellivision Master Component with minor cosmetic
   differences. To make it worse: at the January 1987 CES, INTV Corp.
   announced the INTV System IV, which shouldn't be confused with the
   Intellivision IV. The INTV System IV was really the Intellivision III;
   Glenn Hightower of APh had convinced INTV's Terry Valeski that the
   system was still viable. INTV Corporation, however, was not; despite
   making the announcement, they didn't have the financial resources
   needed to actually resume the development that had stopped
   three-and-a-half years earlier.

Intellivision IV Master Component [UNRELEASED] Development History ÃÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÙ

   After the Intellivision Keyboard Component was canceled, Dave
   Chandler and his design group were able to devote full time to their
   biggest project: Intellivision IV. Intellivision III had been
   rushed into development simply as a stop-gap product to compete
   short-term with Colecovision. Intellivision IV, on the other hand, was
   to introduce the next generation of video game systems.

   Code named Decade, since it was to be the cornerstone product of
   Mattel Electronics for the rest of the eighties, Intellivision IV was
   developed from mid-1982 to mid-1983 secretly in an unmarked building a
   mile away from Mattel headquarters. Being away from the daily whims
   and pressures of marketing and administration, Chandler's group was
   able to create freely.

   The system they created was based on the MC68000 processor, the CPU
   later used in the first Macintoshes and the Amiga. Video was handled
   by a custom chip named Magic. Screen resolution was 240 by 192 pixels
   (40 by 24 4-color 6x8 cards) with a programmable 16-color palette,
   16x16 4-color sprites and hardware scrolling. On-board software
   supported 3-D graphics along with music and speech synthesis. The
   Combo chip coordinated peripheral devices, including a built-in modem:
   a point-of-view two-person tank battle played over phone lines was
   talked about as a typical Intellivision IV application.

   Unlike the other hardware in development in 1983, the Intellivision IV
   had the potential of being a significant step forward; after
   Intellivision III was canceled, many people saw Intellivision IV as
   the last hope for the company. The hope didn't last long. Losses kept
   mounting and on July 12, 1983 the president of Mattel Electronics,
   Josh Denham, was replaced with Mack Morris. Morris set about shifting
   the company from hardware to software; on August 4 most of the
   hardware people were laid off, including those working on
   Intellivision IV. The shift didn't help; January 20, 1984, Mattel
   Electronics was shut down.

   Would Chandler's group have succeeded in creating a super game machine
   at an affordable price, or would it have been another Keyboard
   Component? With all the secrecy surrounding the project, it's not
   known how far along the system really was. We do know it never reached
   the stage of actual game development; about the only involvement the
   Blue Sky Rangers had with Intellivision IV was when Dave Chandler
   borrowed a couple of graphic artists to create some demo screens. A
   screen shot of Castle Grayskull from Masters of the Universe, rendered
   by Joe Ferreira, is about all that remains of the game machine that was
   going to save Mattel Electronics.



Keyboard Component #1149 Development History ³
ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÙ

   When the Intellivision was first introduced, it was intended to be more
   than a mere Video Game system. The Intellivision Master Component was to
   be the foundation of a home computer system. By adding the Keyboard
   Component, the Intellivision was meant to assist and educate its owners,
   hence the moniker "Intelligent Intellivision".

   The Keyboard Component was developed by Dave Chandler's engineering group.
   This group was also responsible for giving the Intellivision its initial
   look. The Keyboard Component, code named "The Blue Whale" and sometimes
   referred to as the "Intelliputer", matched the Master Compnents chocolate
   brown and gold plate design.

   The Keyboard Component was an impressive piece of engineering. The
   Intellivision Master Component was meant to drop in to the Keyboard
   Component, to complete the system. Program cartridges would then plug
   into the Keyboard Component cartridge slot. It sported a 60 key typewriter
   style keyboard, a built in tape deck for storing data and programs. A
   Microphone was also included. A separate 40 column thermal printer was
   also developed for the system, and sold separately via mail order.

   Internally, the Keyboard Component had its own 6502 Microprocessor,
   which handled input and output. The Keyboard came equiped with 64K
   of dual port Random Access Memory. The tape deck could synchronize audio
   with programs and graphics, and contained a sophisticated block addressable
   interface! The supplied microphone could be used to record audio which
   could be played back under program control. The Keyboard Component program
   cassette "Conversational French" used this feature. Other programs on
   cassette included Jack La Lanne's Physical Conditioning, Spelling Challenge,
   and Jeane Dixon Astrology. These programs were all coded in CP1610
   assembly language, and they took full advantage of the system's sound
   and graphic capabilities. There was also a BASIC programming language
   cartridge which could be plugged into the cart port which allowed the
   use of simpler BASIC programs. These included Geography Challenge, Family
   Budgeting, and Crosswords I, II, and III. Of course, the user could write
   programs using the BASIC cartridge.

   Unfortunately for Intellivision owners, all of these impressive features,
   such as 64K Random Access Memory drove the final cost of the Keyboard
   Component too high. The Keyboard Component was supposed to be an
   inexpensive add on. Only Dave Chandler's reputation saved the Keyboard
   Component from being killed off early in the Intellivision's life.
   Chandler's group was allowed to continue working on it, trying to bring
   the cost down. This effort was largely unsuccessful, and the Keyboard's
   release date was delayed repeatedly.

   The Keyboard was supposed to be available in 1981. Early Intellivision
   game packaging stated; "For use with Intellivision Master Component
   (Avalable now), or with Master Component and Keyboard Component (Coming
   soon) in combination". The mention of the Keyboard Component was soon
   dropped, as it became clear no Keyboard Component was coming.

   Jay Leno got a huge laugh when entertaining at the Mattel Electronics
   1981 Christmass Party with the line; "You know what the three big lies
   are, don't you?  'The cheque is in the mail', 'I'll still respect you
   in the moring', and 'The Keyboard will be out in the spring!'"

   Unfortunately for Mattel, consumer complaints from people who bought
   the Intellivision with the intention of upgrading it to a computer,
   caused the U.S. Federal Trade Commision to investigate them for possible
   fraud. Mattel Electronics claimed the Keyboard Component was a real
   product, which was still being test marketed. A few select stores
   received Keyboard Components, and they were made available to customers
   who complained (at a loss to Mattel) via mail order. The add on thermal
   printer however, was only made available through mail order. The same
   printer design was later recycled for use with the Aquarius computer
   system, which had a somewhat wider release.

   Ultimately, the U.S. Federal Trade Commission reportedly fined
   Mattel Electronics $10,000 per month, until the Keyboard Component
   was in wide release. This situation forced Mattel Electronics to
   release the Entertainment Computer System, or ECS. Code named "LUCKI"
   for "low user cost keyboard interface" it had been quietly developed
   by Design and development as a possible alternative to the Keyboard
   Component.

   The Keyboard Component has now become the "Holy Grail" for those
   attempting to put together a complete Intellivision collection. They
   are very rare, and highly sought after. The following is a message from
   a former Keyboard Component user which was posted on UseNet.

                               ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ

Re: Intellivision Keyboard Component
From: Ronald E Engel rengel@jis.net

Since I've never seen any posts from anyone that owned one of the original
Intellivision computers, I thought I would take the opportunity to try and
do it some justice.

My family was one of the few that purchased the unit and I had it as a kid.
IT WAS TERRIFIC. It was IMHO way ahead of its time in terms of its
programmability, graphics, user-friendliness, etc. I later had an Atari
400, 800 and then an Apple II and it was, in many ways, superior to them all.

There were only a few software titles available at the time and the only
ones I had were utilities/educational (Conversational French, Personal
Finance, BASIC programming, etc.), so I couldn't vouch for its game play,
but the applications I had were terrific.
The Conversational French featured a female lead character, Mimi, who
led you around France...for the learning part, it showed a close up of her
face and she spoke in French and then you repeated her words into a
microphone and the cassette replayed your voice! She would then respond
with words of encouragement, etc. I was quite a computer junkie at the
time, despite my age, and I had never seen anything like it.
The BASIC programming was equally good. I remember programming on the
later computers and being frustrated in their limitations compared to the
Intellivision computer that I had learned BASIC on.
I also had a small thermal printer from Mattel Electronics. The only
application that I had with any printing functions was BASIC, however.

After eagerly awaiting the other software titles (especially the enhanced
Intellivision sports games that were advertised) and the other accesories,
my family received a rebate offer from Mattel with a letter stating that
the system would no longer be supported. And even though we enjoyed the
system as much as we did, we reluctatly returned it for approximately
$700, which was just slightly less than the original purchase price if I
remember correctly.

Because of my fond memories of the unit and its incredible rarity, I think
of it as the crown jewel of classic video game collecting (once again
IMHO).

I only know of one still in existence. Are there any others?


Entertainment Computer System Development History ÃÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÙ

COMPUTER ADAPTOR & KEYBOARD #4187 MUSIC SYNTHESIZER #4188 ³
ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÙ

   Midway through 1981, Richard Chang's Design & Development
   group began work on the Basic Discovery System (BDS). This was
   announced within the company as a plug-in module for the Intellivision
   that would introduce kids to computer programming through an
   inexpensive keyboard and a simplified, color-coded version of BASIC.

   Only a few people knew the real purpose behind the BDS. The Federal
   Trade Commission was starting to look into fraud charges against
   Mattel for not releasing the Intellivision Keyboard Component. Key
   people at the top of Mattel Electronics, concerned that Dave "Papa
   Intellivsion" Chandler's engineering group would never make the
   Keyboard Component cost-effective, started looking for something they
   could release in its place. Afraid Chandler had the political clout
   within Mattel, Inc. (the parent company), to kill any effort to
   develop an alternative to the Keyboard, they had to keep their
   intentions secret.

   The Design & Development group was challenged to build a module for
   the Intellivision that would be inexpensive (under $150 retail) but
   would fulfill the basic original promises of the Keyboard Component:
   turn the Intellivision into a computer, make it possible to write
   programs and store them to tape, and interface with a printer.

   The design for the module was worked out by Jan Chodak and principally
   implemented by Greg Goodknight. The simplified BASIC interpreter was
   mainly programmed Jay Hastroudian. As work on the module progressed,
   it was officially listed and discussed in memos as an additional
   product for the Intellivision line, never as a replacement for the
   Keyboard Component.

   But the issue was forced when the FTC started fining Mattel monthly
   until the Keyboard Component was released. Finally, the Basic
   Discovery System was openly advanced as a possible alternative to the
   Keyboard. Renamed Lucky (from LUCKI: Low User-Cost Keyboard
   Interface), it was presented to the programmers to start developing
   games.

   (The idea of a music keyboard add-on came from within Design &
   Development. Musical instruments were pet projects of the group. They
   had already produced Synsonics Drums, and electronic guitars, basses,
   and brass/woodwinds were in the works. Other ECS add-ons briefly
   worked on in D&D: a Biofeedback Module and a Camera Module.)

   In fall of 1982, at the annual meeting of Mattel's marketing people,
   sales staff and distributors, Lucky -- the Computer Module, the
   Computer Keyboard, and the Music Synthesizer -- was presented under
   its final name: the Entertainment Computer System (ECS). Everyone at
   the meeting was delighted (mainly by the low retail price) and the
   obvious became official: the Intellivision Keyboard Component was
   dead.

   A pre-Christmas commercial was rushed onto the air with Mattel
   Electronics spokesman George Plimpton teasing the introduction of the
   ECS (using the inside joke "[Intellivision owners] won't believe their
   luck!"). Although the ECS wasn't available for Christmas 1982, the aim
   of the commercial was to get people to buy Intellivisions instead of
   Ataris or Colecovisions with the promise (once again) that a computer
   add-on was just around the corner.

   Officially introduced to the public at the January 1983 Consumer
   Electronic Show (CES) in Las Vegas, ECS hit the market later that year
   with a handful of games. Satisfied, the FTC dropped the monthly fine.

   Note: The ECS styling is similar to the Intellivision II. In Europe,
   the ECS was released with BROWN plastic to match the original Master
   Component.

   By the time ECS was released, however, the focus at Mattel Electronics
   had shifted. After the June 1983 CES in Chicago, Josh Denham and Stav
   Prodomou, Mattel Electronics' President and Senior Operations VP,
   resigned. Josh and Stav had been blamed for pushing the company too
   far into hardware production; hundreds of millions of dollars had been
   tied up in the development, beyond the original Intellivision, of the
   Keyboard Component, Intellivoice, Intellivision II, the System
   Changer, ECS, Aquarius (and peripherals), Intellivision III and the
   top-secret Intellivision IV. On July 12, 1983, Josh was replaced by
   Mack Morris, a marketing man famous for putting the blue dot on Breath
   Savers mints. (The gimmick or hook that set a game apart quickly
   became known as its "blue dot" around Mattel.) Under Mack Morris, the
   emphasis was put almost entirely on software (nearly everyone related
   to hardware development was laid off on August 4, 1983). The ECS
   received very little marketing push and further game development for
   it dropped to almost nothing.


PlayCable Intellivision/Cable TV Adapter (Model PCR) Development History ³
ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÙ


Mattel Intellivision Playcable Graphic³
ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÙ
                                                    ÚÄÄÄ Cable In
                                                    
                                               ÚÄÄÄÁÄÁÄÄÄ¿ RF
                                               ³  ÄÄÄÄÄ  ³ Box
                                               ÀÂÄÂÂÄÂÂÄÂÙ
                                                ÀÂÙÀÂÙÀÂÙ
                                   ÚÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÙ  ³  ³
                                   ³   To TV ÄÄÄÄÄÄÙ  ³
                                                      
  ÚÄÄÄÄÄÁÄÁÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÁÄÁÄÄÄÄÂÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÁÄÁÄÄ¿
  ³ ÚÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ¿ ³ ÚÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ¿ ³
  ³ ³                                  ³ ³ ³             ³ ³
  ³ ÀÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÙ ³ ÀÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÙ ³
  ³ ÚÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÂÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÂÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ¿ ³                 ³
  ³ ³ÚÄÄ¿... ³ ÚÂÂÂÂÂ¿ ÚÂÂÂÂ¿ ³ ...ÚÄÄ¿³ ³                 ³
  ³ ³³  ³... ³ ÃÅÅÅÅÅ´ ÃÅÅÅÅ´ ³ ...³  ³³ ³                 ³
  ³ ³ÀÄÄÙ... ³ ÀÁÁÁÁÁÙ ÀÁÁÁÁÙ ³ ...ÀÄÄÙ³ ³                 ³
  ³ ÀÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÁÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÁÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÙ ³                 ³
  ³ ÚÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ¿ ³ ÚÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ¿ ³
  ³ ³ Mattel Electronics Intellivision ³ ³ ³             ³ ³
  ³ ÀÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ[] []ÄÙ ³ ÀÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÙ ³
  ÀÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÁÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÙ
                                            Playcable Box


   Introduced in 1981, PlayCable: The All Game Channel enabled
   local cable operators to send Intellivision games over the wire with
   the TV signal. Subscribers used a special converter -- the PlayCable
   Adapter -- to download the games to play on their Intellivision Master
   Components. While reportedly popular in the areas in which it was
   available, PlayCable was discontinued in 1983.

   The PlayCable Company was a joint venture of Mattel and General
   Instrument, the company that designed the Intellivision chip set.
   The units themselves were manufactured by General Instrument's Jerrold
   Division, which supplies cable TV converter boxes.

   The PlayCable matched the original Intellivision Master Component
   in design. It plugged into the Master Component's cartridge slot and
   hooked up to the TV cable. Switching on the Intellivision brought up
   several pages of on-screen menus, displaying the available games.
   Twenty titles were available at a time, rotated monthly. The object
   code for these games was being continuously broadcast over the cable;
   when one was chosen, its code would be "tuned in" and fed into the
   PlayCable's memory (taking about 10 seconds). The Intellivision would
   then read the PlayCable's memory as if it were a game cartridge.

   Several factors contributed to the systems demise:

     * The PlayCable Adapter contained insufficient memory to download
       the larger (8K and above) games introduced in 1983. The converter
       boxes would either have to be upgraded or the system limited to
       older games.
     * With the growing number of channels that subscribers were
       demanding ("I want my MTV!"), most cable operators felt reserving
       bandwidth for PlayCable wasn't worth it (especially considering
       the hardware investment needed to provide the service).
     * At least two people figured out that a PlayCable could make a
       dandy Intellivision development system. By hooking up a personal
       computer to a PlayCable and poking around by trial and error, they
       quickly decoded the EXEC software and started writing their own
       games. While these two were kept from competing with Mattel by
       hiring them to program the Intellivision Bump 'N' Jump arcade
       conversion, management was afraid PlayCable would make it too easy
       for small companies to get into the Intellivision-compatible
       business.

   Subscribers rented the PlayCable Adapters from the cable companies.
   When the system was discontinued in 1983, the adapters had to be
   returned.

System Changer ATARI 2600 ADAPTOR #4610 Development History ³
ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÙ


Mattel Intellivision System Changer Graphic³
ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÙ

   ÉÍÍÍÍÍÍÍÍÍÍÍÍÍÍÍÍÍÍÍÍÍÍÍÍÍÍÍÍ»      ÚÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ¿
   º ÚÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ¿ÚÄÄÄÄÄÄ¿ÚÄÄÄÄÄÄ¿ º      ³    ÚÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ¿    ³
   º ³ğğğğğğğ ³³ ÚÄÄ¿ ³³ ÚÄÄ¿ ³ º      ³    ÃÄ           Ä´    ³
   º ³ğğğğğğğ ³³ ³..³ ³³ ³..³ ³ º ÚÄÄÄÄÙ    ÀÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÙ    ³
   º ³ğğğğğğğ ³³ ³..³ ³³ ³..³ ³ º Ã                            ³
   º ³        ³³ ÀÄÄÙ ³³ ÀÄÄÙ ³ º Ã ÄÄÄ To Intellivision II   ³
   º ³ ÚÄÄ¿   ³³ ÚÄÄ¿ ³³ ÚÄÄ¿ ³ º Ã       ÚÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ¿  ³
   º ³ ÀÄÄÙ o Ã´ ÀÄÄÙ Ã´ ÀÄÄÙ ³ º ÀÄÄÄÄ¿  ³  1  ³2³3³4³  5  ³  ³
   º ÀÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÁÁÄÄÄÄÄÄÁÁÄÄÄÄÄÄÙ º      ³  ÀÄÄÄÄÄÁÄÁÄÁÄÁÄÄÄÄÄÙ  ³
   ÈÍÍÍÍÍÍÍÍÍÍÍÍÍÍÍÍÍÍÍÍÍÍÍÍÍÍÍÍ¼      ÀÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÙ

                              Legend:
                         1 - Game Select
                         2 - Left Difficulty
                         3 - Color / BW Switch
                         4 - Right Difficulty
                         5 - Game Reset  


   The System Changer, developed under the code name Portofino
   (after the Redondo Beach hotel where the first design meeting was
   held), was introduced in 1983 just so Intellivision could be
   advertised as the system that played the most games.

   Many people expressed amazement that the Intellivision's processor
   could emulate an Atari 2600. Well, it can't. The System Changer is
   itself simply an Atari 2600 clone -- essentially a 6507 processor, a
   TIA (Television Interface Adaptor) video/sound chip, and a 6532 RIOT
   chip (128 bytes RAM, I/O ports, and a general purpose timer). The
   System Changer only uses the Intellivision for its power supply and RF
   modulator.

   (The Intellivision reads the System Changer as a game cartridge called
   M Network and actually draws an M Network title screen. With no
   cartridge in the System Changer -- hence no external video signal --
   this title screen is displayed on the television. When a cartridge is
   plugged in, the external video signal takes over the RF modulator,
   displaying the output of the System Changer, instead.)

   Although Atari threatened to sue, Mattel's lawyers concluded that it
   would be legal to clone 2600s since they contained all off-the-shelf
   hardware and no copyrightable software (as an Intellivision or
   Colecovision does). No lawsuit appeared, and clones started appearing
   from other companies.

   Don't bother opening a System Changer to read what the chips are.
   Instead of being housed in the familiar DIP (multi-pin) packages, the
   integrated circuits are soldered directly to the printed circuit board
   using microscopic wires, then protected with a blob of epoxy. This
   cost saving technique was also used in most of the later game
   cartridges.

   The only problem was that the Intellivision doesn't have an
   external video input. The Intellivision II was designed with the
   System Changer in mind -- it can accept an external video signal on
   pin 2 of the cartridge port and pass it to the RF modulator.

   But the Intellivision (and its clones -- the Tandyvision One, Sears
   Super Video Arcade, any of the INTV Master Components) requires a
   circuit-board modification. Mattel used to perform this modification
   for people who brought their units to a service center.


The "Blue Sky Rangers"  ÃÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÙ

When Mattel Electronics launched the Intellivision, all the original
games were programmed by APh Technology Consultants. To develop games
"In house" a large amount of talented programmers were hired. Mattel was
afraid these programmers would be lured away by arch rival Atari, or by
other start up companies such as Imagic and Activision. In order to
protect themselves from corporate head hunters, Mattel attempted to
hide the identity of their programmers. In a 1982 TV Guide interview, the
real names of the programmers were changed. The programmers in this article
were refered to as the "Blue Sky Rangers". The moniker stuck, and from that
time onward, the programmers adopted this new name. They even produced a
T-shirt. Now, many years later, the Rangers have their own World
Wide Web site, and sell copies of their "BSR" T-shirt to the public.

On this web site, a great portion of information for De Re Intellivision
was obtained. The site is maintained by Keith Robinson who wrote Tron
Solar Sailer and is located as of Winter 1997/1998 at;

               www.makingit.com/makingit/bluesky/

The Blue Sky Rangers continue to meet periodically for reunions. Despite the
untimely demise of their jobs at Mattel Electronics, many have gone on to
successful enterprises in the video game industry. In fact, many Blue Sky
Rangers are responsible for the later releases of games by INTV Corporation.

The following text is a transcript of the TV Guide article first presented
on June 19, 1982.

  ÚÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ¿
  ³ Behind the scenes with the Blue Sky Rangers who dream up Mattel's  ³
  ³                           video games                              ³
  ÀÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÙ
                            By Howard Polskin

   I'm surrounded by the Blue Sky Rangers, nine guys who talk as though
   they could do their math homework without hand-held calculators.

   We're sitting in a windowless conference room at Mattel's corporate
   offices just south of Los Angeles airport. The giant toy company's
   electronic games division is holding a formal brainstorming session to
   dream up new programs for the voracious video-game market. The process
   is known as blue-skying. The programmers who probe the outer
   boundaries of their imagination for ideas are the Blue Sky Rangers.

   Blue-skying is the first and one of the most important steps in
   video-game development, a process that takes as long as 20 months to
   develop a $30 plastic cartridge that can be inserted into Mattel's
   video game Intellivision, a sophisticated $250 piece of hardware that
   connects to any color-TV set.

   The nine programmers chosen for this meeting are part of a
   specialized, 22 person (18 men, four women) team of video-game
   programmers (whose ranks have since more than doubled). Because Mattel
   fears that rival firms would lure their people away if their
   identities were revealed, I've changed their names.

   Except for Hal, the gentle 36-year-old group leader, they're mostly
   under 30 and border on that fine line between eccentric and brilliant.
   They're paid to think (between $20,000 and $40,000 a year) and it
   reflects in their appearance. They're haphazardly dressed. For the
   most part, their eyes seem sunken and hollow from countless hours
   spent toiling indoors in front of computer terminals. They all work in
   carpeted cubicles in a vast windowless room that seems designed to
   turn their thoughts inward.

   For all the Blue Sky Rangers, video-game programming is not an
   occupation but a joyful passion. Many times during the work day,
   programmers let out shrieks of delight as they engage in one of the
   "routines" of the job: playing with the product. During coffee breaks,
   programmers will sometimes drop what they are doing -- which is often
   developing a new game -- only to play another game already created. At
   the end of a hard day's work, it is not uncommon for programmers to
   wind down by heading to a local arcade to play the more sophisticated
   coin-operated games.

   About 70 per cent of a programmer's time will be spent actually
   sitting at a computer terminal, programming a game. The rest of the
   time is occupied by thinking up and talking about new games.

   The formal creative sessions are held in a variety of locations to
   spark as much creativity as possible. One of Mattel's most productive
   brainstorming meetings took place in a Los Angeles park on a beautiful
   spring day in 1981.

   About 10 programmers, led by Hal, drove to the park. They loosened up
   their minds and bodies by tossing around a few Frisbees. At lunch they
   nibbled on sandwiches provided by Mattel. Most of all, they talked
   about new video games in the cool shade of a large gazebo in the
   center of the park. Their only distraction was a park custodian who
   was painting the gazebo. They joked all day that he was a spy from
   Atari, a rival firm.

   The programmers tried to conceive games that would use Mattel's newly
   developed device called Intellivoice, which adds the realism of
   human-sounding voices speaking to the player. All day they struggled
   for inspiration. Then, toward dusk, the brilliant idea surfaced.

   No one quite knows who suggested it, although four programmers got
   credit for the idea, including Josh, a computer whiz from Princeton.
   The game, eventually called B-17 Bomber, would simulate an Allied
   aircraft flying over occupied Europe while avoiding flak and enemy
   aircraft. Different crew members positioned off-screen talk to the
   pilot via Intellivoice, advising him to take appropriate actions such
   as "Drop bombs" or "Zoom to the left." The game seemed to have those
   magical qualities that instantly identified it as a winner.

   Soon after the meeting, Hal assigned Josh, one of his top programmers,
   to develop the concept further. Josh recently completed programming
   Astrosmash, one of Mattel's biggest-selling cartridges. Before joining
   Mattel, Josh worked at the UCLA School of Medicine in bio-mathematical
   cancer research. His senior thesis at Princeton was a statistical
   linguistic analysis of the writings of Sir Arthur Conan Doyle, author
   of the Sherlock Holmes mysteries. In his spare time, he presides over
   a society of Sherlock Holmes freaks in Santa Monica.

   For the task of developing B-17 Bomber, Josh drove himself
   relentlessly. Besides often working till midnight at the computer
   terminal, he made several visits to the Air Museum outside Los
   Angeles, where, after befriending the curator, he was allowed to crawl
   through an old B-17 on exhibit. He learned how the aircraft operated,
   where the gunners sat and how targets looked to them. Soon his small
   office was cluttered with models of B-17s sitting next to his Sherlock
   Holmes memorabilia.

   After more than a year of development, many of Josh's fellow
   programmers feel that it is one of the best home-video games ever
   devised. Soon they'll know if the public feels the same way. Sometime
   in late summer or early fall, B-17 Bomber will be made available to
   the home video game market.

   At the blue-sky meeting I'm attending, Josh is one of the most
   talkative programmers, spewing out an assortment of off beat ideas and
   jokes. The session begins informally with Hal inserting a new video
   game cartridge, tentatively called ZZAP, into the master component.
   Sometimes, a game that's well under development will be critiqued to
   iron out weak spots. Hal pushes a button, and computer-generated
   images of ships at sea chased by submarines appear on the screen.

   "It doesn't have something," says Hal. "I can't figure it out."

   "The motions of the subs are random," says Josh. "But I like it
   because you get to hit a lot of things and they blow up. I mean, isn't
   that the purpose of life?"

   Everyone laughs.

   Hal isn't convinced, though.

   "Maybe we should make the graphics better and change the speed of the
   torpedoes," he suggests.

   Bob, at 23 the youngest member of the group and an avid reader of
   Shakespeare and science fiction, says he doesn't like the game.

   "OK," says Hal, "then let's think of other games."

   That triggers a flood of ideas for the next hour. The game with ships
   and submarines appears to be forgotten, although it is being
   considered as a Mattel product. Hal keeps nodding wisely, never
   putting down anyone, no matter how ludicrous the suggestions.

   Finally, one idea hits. It is another air plane game and, like B-17
   Bomber, it, too, will utilize Intellivoice. No one's sure what form
   the game should take but everyone tends to agree that the plane should
   be in some sort of trouble.

   After 15 minutes' nonstop discussion, Hal seems to feel that the Blue
   Sky Rangers, who are now clearly excited by this game, have talked
   enough about it. Later he will review the notes of the meeting and
   decide if the idea warrants further development.

   "Ideas for other games," he now commands gently.

   More comments flow from all corners of the room. The programmers talk
   about games with sorcerers, games with comic book heroes and games
   with weird monsters. The suggestions dwindle. The programmers seem
   restless. Hal senses the change in mood and tells everyone that the
   meeting will now be shifted to Barnabey's, a local hotel in Manhattan
   Beach, down the road from Mattel.

   It's 5 o'clock and they've been at it for more than two hours, but Hal
   thinks he can milk some more ideas out of them. In his 18 months at
   Mattel, he's accumulated more than 1000 video-game ideas, but feels he
   can never have enough.

   As we drive to Barnabey's, Hal explains to me that he ended the
   meeting because his guys needed a break. The change of atmosphere
   might spark their thinking. Also, he plans to pump some wine into them
   to help loosen their thoughts.

   At Barnabey's, Hal has rented a large private room, where dinner will
   be served later in the evening. First, one of the programmers, Jason,
   gathers everyone into the center of the room. He takes out a large bag
   and scatters its contents on the floor. About 20 toys come tumbling
   out, including a plastic rat, a flag gun, a spiked coin and fake mouse
   ears.

   "Pick up a toy and make a game that relates to it," says Jason. "After
   dinner, we'll report back on what we came up with."

   They all grab toys and huddle in groups of three. As they play with
   the toys, befuddled waiters hover over them, pouring glasses of wine.
   After 45 minutes, the programmers sit down to dinner in the suite.
   They bring their toys to the table.

   But as they eat and drink, the wine and toys fail to trigger any
   brilliant plans for video games. They toss out concepts for games
   about ethnic folklore, Greek mythology and even video Ouija boards.

   The ideas and wine keep flowing. But either the ideas are
   deteriorating or they are getting so strange that I can't follow them.
   When one programmer starts elaborating on a game based on a Hawaiian
   war chant, I know that the Blue Sky Rangers have soared out of orbit.
   No one's mentioned holographic video games but I know if we stay here
   another hour and drink more of this cheap California wine, someone
   will suggest it and Hal will nod knowingly.

   At 8:30, after more than five and a half hours of brainstorming, Hal
   announces that he'd like to end the meeting. But some of the Blue Sky
   Rangers don't want to quit. They're having too much fun. Their
   circuits must be overloaded because even as they're getting into their
   cars to drive away, they keep rambling on like defective computers,
   spitting out meaningless data about their beloved video games. They're
   so hopelessly addicted to their work that some, like Josh, will go
   back to their offices and work till 2 A.M.

   Hal's job in the next few days will be to examine the notes from the
   meeting and select versions of the better ideas. If he likes what he
   sees, he brings the game before a group of four to six Mattel
   executives, who examine the concept from technical, marketing and
   financial viewpoints. Ultimately, they will decide if it will become a
   product. Most of the time, when Hal thinks that a game is worth
   bringing before this committee, it stands an excellent chance of being
   developed. Some times, as in the case of a sailboat game that one of
   the programmers devised, they can't get a decent visualization and the
   game is scrapped.

   After a game is given the go-ahead, another two to five months are
   spent programming the cartridge. At this stage, product engineering
   and marketing groups are brought into the picture, and Hal's role
   starts to fade. The businessmen get out their pencils and hammer out
   production schedules, marketing plans and profit projections. Compared
   to working with the programmers, it's bland, boring stuff. The Blue
   Sky Rangers are special. They get paid to have fun. The more fun they
   have, the better they create.

   When Mattel wants to stroke them, it knows which buttons to push. For
   instance, the night following the creative session at Barnabey's, the
   company threw a party for the programmers (and the marketing people),
   thanking them for all their hard work.

   Mattel didn't rent a yacht or take them to a fancy disco. It went one
   step further. The company created an event that is probably every Blue
   Sky Ranger's definition of heaven.

   The party was held in an empty Redondo Beach video game arcade, and
   every game was free for the night.
                      ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ

The Blue Sky Rangers T-shirt is light blue, and features a portrait of
Gabriel Baum, the Vice President of Applications Software who was "Hal".
The motto "In Hal We Trust" was also placed around the caricature of "Hal".
The shirts are 100 % heavy cotton with the dark blue logo on the front.
Send a personal cheque or money order for $12 US funds plus $2 postage and
handling (customers outside the USA please add $1. California residents must
add 8.25 % sales tax.) to:

The Blue Sky Rangers
P.O. Box 10007-64
Manhattan Beach, CA 90266
U.S.A.

To order by credit cart (Visa, Master Card or American Express) call
310-379-5337


                 ÚÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ¿
                 ³ Blue Sky Rangers Questions/Answers ³
                 ÃÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÁÄÄÄÄÄÄ¿
                 ³                                           ³
                 ³By:   Keith Robinson                       ³
                 ³      The Blue Sky Rangers                 ³
                 ³      www.makingit.com/makingit/bluesky/   ³
                 ³                                           ³
                 ³      Making It Productions                ³
                 ³      makingit@netcom.com                  ³
                 ³      http://www.makingit.com/makingit/    ³
                 ³                                           ³
                 ÀÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÙ


The following questions and answers were constructed by various responses
from the "Blue Sky Rangers" to questions posed on the Internet UseNet
Newsgroup Rec.Video.Games.Classic.


Q. I recently came across a pile of Intellivision carts with white labels
   only and was wondering if anybody out there knew the scoop on them.
   Are they any rarer than the coloured versions? The manuals also are
   in B&W only, not like the ones I already have.

A. Pretty cheesy, huh? I was in charge of printing those; Terry Valeski
   contracted with me to provide all the packaging for the INTV Corporation
   releases. He wanted costs as low as possible, so overlays were eliminated
   where possible (Mattel's policy was that every game had to have overlays,
   even if they weren't really needed, such as for Pinball; Valeski got rid
   of them), manuals became black & white (folded, not stapled) and labels
   were printed on whatever stock my printer had leftover and would give me a
   price break on. That's why you'll find different size labels on different
   copies of the same game.

   Of course, INTV didn't invent this cost cutting. Mattel's Intellivision
   packaging went downhill quickly, too. The original boxes opened like a
   book and had a plastic tray the cartridge fit into. Manuals were all full
   color. The plastic tray was the first thing to go, then the manuals
   went to two-color, then the boxes simply became boxes (some games, like
   BurgerTime, were released in both versions of the boxes).

   At INTV, we printed the boxes on an even cheaper grade of cardboard, but
   at least Valeski wanted them to be colorful. I designed most of them with
   an art budget of about $800 per box. A painter named Steve Huston did the
   Super Pro sports covers and I did most of the cartoony covers (Thin Ice,
   Learning Fun I & II). Other artists and photographers did individual
   titles. I had Joe Ferreira, who did the graphics for Hover Force, do the
   artwork for the box. And if the cover art for Thunder Castle looks more
   threatening than the cute graphics in the game, it's because that artwork
   had been commissioned by Mattel for the Tower of Doom cartridge. Valeski
   had it used for Thunder Castle since that game was already completed when
   he bought the Intellivision rights; Tower of Doom was incomplete. He had
   Tower of Doom finished later and I had to come up with new art for its
   box.

   (By the way, look for the number 47 on the INTV boxes; that number is how
   Pomona College alumni sort of say "hello" to each other. Dave Warhol, the
   Pomona alum who produced these games, asked me to slip a 47 into the art
   whenever possible. Trivia: another Pomona Alum got onto the staff of Star
   Trek, which is why the number 47 pops up in most episodes of Next Generation
   and Voyager, and TWICE in the movie Generations.)

   Sorry that I can't answer your real question though, namely which labels
   are worth more. That's a question for the collectors. But remembering how
   quickly some of this stuff was slapped together, it amuses me today to
   hear people pondering their value.


Q. I have Intv corp Super Baseball, Football, Skiing, and Tennis, and
   although all have white labels, the text is different (collecting 2x of
   every Intv cart made so I have something to compare). What happened there?

A. Without seeing them, I would guess that you're comparing Intellivision Inc.
   labels with INTV Corporation labels. Intellivision Inc. was the company
   that took over the rights from Mattel; Terry Valeski was president, and
   his investors were merchandise liquidators. During that period, they did
   manufacture new copies of some of the popular games, but mostly they were
   selling off the exsisting Mattel stock. Once the stock was pretty much
   depleted, Terry bought the rights from his investors and changed the name
   of the company to INTV. He commissioned new games and continued
   manufacturing many of the old ones. I was brought in at that point to do the
   packaging; while I got the original artwork for the boxes and instructions,
   I simply did new typesetting for the labels. The Intellivision Inc. labels
   usually have a copyright notice [ (c)I.I. 19XX U.S.A., where the year is
   the year of the Mattel copyright]; the INTV labels don't.

   OR...as I said in a previous post, the labels were printed on whatever
   leftover stock my printer had and would give me a price break on. In some
   cases, the labels were so much shorter than what we had used previously,
   that I had to re-typeset some titles in a condensed font.


Q. Burgertime for the Colecovision, was made by Coleco, not Mattel
   who did the other systems versions, right?

A. Actually, Mattel DID do it; it was programmed at our European office in
   the south of France. It was nearly completed when Mattel Electronics was
   shut down in the US (we showed it with the Mattel Electronics title screen
   at the January 1984 Consumer Electronics Show), but by law Mattel had to
   keep the French office open until they could find a buyer for it. So the
   programmers were kept on payroll finishing BurgerTime and several other
   games. Finally, Tim Scanlon, director of the office, found investors so
   that the division could buy itself from Mattel and become independent.
   Part of the deal was that they got the rights to the games they were
   working on. Their new company Nice Dreams (they were located near Nice)
   sold the Colecovision versions of BurgerTime and Illusions (an original
   game) to Coleco, and their Intellivision versions of Championship Tennis
   and World Cup Soccer (originally intended to be 4-player games for the
   ECS) to INTV. Their Intellivision version of Illusions was never released.

   We don't know what happened to Nice Dreams after those four games were
   released; a check with the French Commerce office last year failed to
   turn up a "Nice Dreams" still in business in France.
 


Q. Did the original Intellivision Keyboard Component use normal audio
   casettes, or something special to the Intellivision?

A. With the Microsoft BASIC cartridge, users could write their own programs
   and save them to tape on the built-in tape drive. Mattel sold special Data
   Storage Cassettes, which were similar to normal audio cassettes except
   they had no leader (same as some answering machines use).

Q. Roughly how many Keyboard Components were made available to the public,
   and what did they retail for?

A. Just over 4,000 Keyboard Components were manufactured, but no one knows
   how many actually wound up in the hands of consumers, or stayed there.
   Mattel tried to buy back all the outstanding units to avoid lawsuits when
   it was discontinued. If you had your receipt, you got a full refund on
   your purchase price (reports on how much the price was vary from $600 to
   $800). If you didn't have a receipt, you were given $550 for
   the unit, $60 for the BASIC cartridge and $30 for each game cassette.

   Some consumers insisted on keeping their Keyboard Component. They were
   allowed to, plus they were given $1000 worth of other Mattel Electronics
   products.

   Either way, they had to sign a statement that read: "By accepting this
   offer, I recognize that I am releasing Mattel Electronics from all
   liability due to its decision to discontinue the keyboard component and
   related products."

   Some of the unsold and returned units were converted into Intellivision
   development stations at Mattel Electronics in California and in France.
   The rest were apparently dismantled and the processors and memory chips
   recycled.


Q. When I turn Chip Shot Golf on, I get a quick flash of another title
   screen that just says "Golf". Why this is?

A. The Intellivision EXEC has a default routine that draws a title screen.
   The early Intellivision games all used this routine. Later Mattel games
   and all of the INTV releases bypass this routine and draw custom title
   screens. But, as you've noticed, timing glitches can cause a flash of the
   default screen. Knowing this can happen, the programmer usually puts the
   name of the game in the memory location where the default routine expects
   to find it. Looks like the programmer, Steve Ettinger, got lazy and just
   put the name "Golf" there, instead of the full name of the cartridge.


Q. While I was playing Chip Shot I found out that if you press the 0 key
   while at the title screen a list of credits pops up. This isn't in the
   documentation, is it common knowledge?

A. Several INTV releases will display the game's credits if you press 0 on
   the title screen: Body Slam, Chip Shot, Super Pro Football, Hover Force,
   Slam Dunk and Tower of Doom. Several others simply display the credits if
   you leave the title screen up long enough: Diner, Monster Truck Rally,
   Mountain Madness, Super Pro Decathlon and Slap Shot.

   They didn't document the "press 0" trick, but they didn't want to make it
   hard to find. What you *aren't* supposed to find is the Chip Shot
   programmer's secret message to his family: press 23 (2 and 3 at the same
   time) on the left hand controller and 26 on the right hand controller and
   press reset.


Q. I have a couple of the probably-rare INTV catalogues. Do you
   remember the one that features Santa Claus playing the intellivision?

A. Hey, that's ME! In addition to the packaging, I designed the INTV catalogs.
   When it came time to shoot the Christmas catalog, I saved money on a model
   by just putting on the Santa suit myself. In the lower right hand corner of
   the photo is a weird looking doll with sunglasses; that's me, too. The
   doll was a gift from Monique Lujan-Bakerink, one of the graphic artists
   who worked with me at Mattel Electronics. She did this "soft-sculpture
   portrait" of me for my 29th birthday.


Q. I love your cartoon Keith.  I'm sorry the Chicago tribune no longer
   carries it :(

A. Me too. But I hope you're reading it weekly on the Making It website at
   http://www.webcom.com/makingit/ (And to tie this all back to Intellivision,
   the character of Prof. Warhol, seen working at his computer this week, is
   based on Dave Warhol, who programmed Mind Strike and Thunder Castle, and
   who designed and supervised most of the original games released by
   INTV Corporation. Dave and I co-designed Normy's Beach-Babe-O-Rama, based
   on my comic strip, released by Electronic Arts for the Sega Genesis.)

Q. Some Mattel and all INTV boxes do not open like the early Network games.
   What happened here?

A. Mattel had already switched from the book-cover boxes to standard boxes
   by the time INTV took over. INTV used up Mattel stock, then made up new
   batches of the most popular games. In these cases, the INTV boxes are
   identical to the Mattel boxes (printed from the same negatives) except
   the Mattel Electronics name is deleted and the INTV name and address is
   added on the back. Major League Baseball also underwent a name change to
   Big League Baseball, since the Major League trademark either expired or
   wasn't transferable.

   All of the INTV games were released in full-color standard boxes, except
   for a brief period where they tried to get away with no boxes -- sending
   out mail orders with the cartridge and instructions simply sealed in a
   plastic bag. Consumers complained -- loudly -- and boxes were quickly
   reinstated.


Q. I'd like to know just who did all these brilliant Data East
   conversions for Mattel.  God, I suspect.  Inty BurgerTime, Bump 'N' Jump,
   and Lock 'N' Chase are among the most satisfying/addictive home system
   titles I've ever played.  Graphics, sounds, level designs, difficulty,
   controls--everything is soooo nice on these games.
   I suspect they gave the 2600 versions to the trainee coders ;)

A. You'd like to know? You only have to ask... BurgerTime was programmed
   by Ray Kaestner, who also did the BurgerTime sequel, Diner, that INTV
   released. (God was a good guess, though.)

   Lock 'N' Chase was done by Mike Winans. After Mike left Mattel, he went
   to Atari where he programmed, appropriately enough, Intellivision Pac Man.

   Bump 'N' Jump is a long story which we will be posting to the website.
   The gist of it is, two guys discovered that if you hooked up a Playcable
   to a personal computer, you got a terrific Intellivision development
   station. They reverse engineered the Intellivision and demonstrated that
   they could write games for it. To keep them and their information out of
   the hands of competitors, we contracted them to program Bump 'N' Jump,
   under the supervision of Dave Warhol, programmer of Mind Strike and later
   producer of all the INTV original releases.


Q. Who owns the rights to all the Intellivision games now that INTV
   Corporation is no more?

A. The rights to the games are tied up in the courts right now following the
   1991 bankruptcy of INTV Corporation. Sometime in the future we may be able
   to offer some of the unreleased games.

Q. What kind of development hardware was used to program the games?

A. At Mattel, development was in a time-sharing minicomputer environment.
   After Mattel, one of our group designed and built a PC compatible
   Intellivision development system and wrote the necessary software, so that
   he could continue commercial development of Intellivision games. He may
   still release some limited edition games; while that remains a possibility,
   he doesn't want to release the technical details of the development system.
   We're respecting his wishes on that -- he certainly invested enough time
   and money that he deserves something back.

   Watch the Blue Sky Rangers website for future announcements.

Q. I just picked up a boxed copy of World Championship Baseball for the
   Intellivision. Now I thought that this was one of the titles that was not
   made by INTV, but the box distinctly says on the back "distributed by
   INTV corporation". Its number is 5789 which is the same as the regular
   Mattel release, so I am confused...

A. World Championship Baseball was programmed at Mattel under the name All
   Star Major League Baseball (it is an enhanced version of the original
   Major League Baseball), but the game was not fully debugged before Mattel
   Electronics was closed down, so Mattel never released it.

   INTV Corporation chose to release the game as-is. They stuck a note on the
   back of the instruction book that reads:

   "Due to the sophisticated and complex nature of this game, at times
   interference may appear on your T.V. screen. If this happens simply
   return to start."

   In other words, it crashes a lot. The "interference" that appears is the
   debugging screen that Mike Minkoff (Director of Applications Software)
   linked into the game to try to figure out what was wrong with it.


Q. My Intellivision is broken! Can you help?

A. One of the most asked questions we get at the Blue Sky Rangers is "Where
   can I get my Intellivision repaired?" Well, the official Intellivision
   repair service (i.e. the one Mattel still refers people to when they call)
   is:

   J.H.C. Electronics Service
   901 South Fremont Avenue #108
   Alhambra, California  91803
   phone: 818-308-1685
   fax:   818-308-1548

  J.H.C. is owned by James Hann, the guy who ran the repair service for
  INTV Corporation. While their primary business is special controllers for
  newer videogame systems, they still have the equipment to test and repair
  Intellivisions and are (amazingly) still willing to do it.

  They advertise: "J.H.C. Electronics will repair any Intellivision video
  game system, no matter where or when purchased, for one low price!
  Complete overhaul, thorough testing, no-charge return shipping to you --
  only $49.95."

  J.H.C. can also repair Intellivoice and computer modules. Call for prices.

  Note: They do NOT have Intellivision II power supplies. They get asked
  that all the time, and they looked into having some made, but the minimum
  order is 500. J.H.C. has 100 people on a list now, and if they get 400
  more commitments they'll have a batch made up. We wouldn't hold our breath,
  unless someone wants to pay $3,000 for the first one to get the ball
  rolling. Still, if you want to be added to the list, e-mail us at
  makingit@netcom.com; we'll pass them along to James if a significant
  number of people write.


Q. Why was Kool Aid Man for the Intellivision different than the Atari
   2600 version instead of being the same like most people would produce?

A. Both games were created specifically for the Kool-Aid tie-in; in
   fact, they were the result of an in-house contest. The reason the two
   games are different is the result of a philosophical difference between
   the programmers and Marketing.

   Since every game system had its strengths and weaknesses, any game
   originally developed for one system (or for the arcades) would suffer
   when adapted for another. For the most part, the programmers wanted every
   game to be an original, designed for a specific system and taking full
   advantage of that system's strengths.

   Marketing wanted games that would be on as many systems as possible, with
   game play and graphics that were recognizable across those systems. They
   argued for simplifying Intellivision graphics on some games to make them
   more like the 2600 versions. (This led to many heated discussions --
   particularly between myself and Marjorie Brent, a marketing person who
   had been a friend of mine from before we both wound up at Mattel.)

   Anyway, Marketing had made a deal with Kool-Aid, then presented the
   deadline to Programming. No game idea was presented to us -- just that it
   had to use Kool-Aid Man. It was, of course, a rush job. We argued that
   the only way to meet the deadline -- which required an Intellivision and
   2600 version to be ready at the same time -- was to allow the programmers
   to develop different games for the two systems; designing to the
   strengths of a system is faster than adapting something around its
   weaknesses.

   We hoped that the result would be two good games instead of one good
   game and a lame adaptation or two passable versions of one game and that
   it would lead to more games in which the Intellivision, 2600, Colecovision
   or whatever versions could differ greatly to take full advantage of each
   system. But Marketing HATED that the two games were different and never
   let us do it again. They said consumers would be confused and angry. And
   you know, based on the e-mail we've received and the posts to this
   newsgroup about Kool-Aid Man, looks like they were right. After 12 years,
   I guess I owe Marjorie an apology.

                                Keith Robinson
                                Blue Sky Rangers
                                http://www.makingit.com/makingit/bluesky/

    _________________________________________________________________

                            The Blue Sky Rangers

                            Where Are They Now?

      AN UPDATE ON MATTEL AND ON COMPANIES FOUNDED BY BLUE SKY RANGERS

     _________________________________________________________________
                                                                         
   QUICKSILVER SOFTWARE

   While Mattel Electronics was collapsing around them, several Blue Sky
   Rangers started planning a new company so they could continue
   producing games. In fact, it was to be called Blue Sky Rangers
   Software, but this was changed to Quicksilver to avoid confusion with
   the already-existing Blue Sky Software. The original owners were Bill
   Fisher (Space Hawk), Steve Roney (Space Spartans) and Mike Breen
   (Buzz Bombers). Only Bill devoted full time to the company, and as it
   grew he bought out the others.

   Today, Quicksilver employs around 20 full-time programmers and
   designers at their Costa Mesa, California, office. They specialize in
   multimedia computer games; their award-winning titles "Castles" and
   "Castles II" set standards for the industry. To find out more about
   Quicksilver, visit their website at www.quicksilver.com/.


   STRAND CRUISERS

   Strand Cruisers was founded in 1985 by Keith Robinson (TRON Solar
   Sailer) to design catalogs, packaging and other visual material for
   high-tech companies. Clients have included Hewlett-Packard, Tandon
   Computers, Sony Interactive and INTV Corporation, for which Strand
   Cruisers designed most of the post-Mattel Intellivision game packages.
   Strand Cruisers has also designed game graphics for Quicksilver
   Software and Realtime Associates.

   Making It Productions, a division of Strand Cruisers, distributes
   Keith's weekly "Making It" comic strip, available on the web at
   www.makingit.com/makingit/. "Making It" is the basis for the
   Electronic Arts Sega Genesis game, "Normy's Beach-Babe-O-Rama."


   REALTIME ASSOCIATES

   Realtime Associates was founded in 1986 by David Warhol (Mind Strike).
   Originally called Warhol Audio Arts and specializing in sound effects
   and music for computer games, Realtime quickly expanded into full game
   development. Over the years, Realtime has employed more than a dozen
   Blue Sky Rangers on a free-lance or permanent basis. Today, they have
   70 full-time employees at their headquarters in El Segundo, California
   and another 30 at their hand-held game development center in Seattle,
   which is run by Steve Ettinger (Hover Force). Realtime has produced
   many video games based on well-known characters, including Ren &
   Stimpy, Beavis & Butthead, and -- yes -- Barney.

   The original Realtime title BUG!, the first U.S. produced title for
   the Sega Saturn, earned great reviews and strong sales. A sequel is on
   the way.

   Dave Warhol has led roundtable discussions on music at the annual
   Computer Game Developers' Conference. Audiotapes of his and other
   conference seminars are available from the Know-It-All Audiovisual
   Library at www.webcom.com/knowit/cgdc/.
   

   NICE IDEAS

   In February 1983, Mattel Electronics opened a programming office in le
   parc international d'activités de Valbonne Sophia Antipolis, a
   heavily-wooded technology park 10 miles inland from the south coast of
   France, midway between Cannes and Nice. With a staff of programmers
   half recruited in London and half in Paris, the office was to develop
   Intellivision and Colecovision games that would reflect and appeal to
   a European sensibility.

   When it came time to shut down Mattel Electronics, it turned out that
   because of French labor laws and the financial incentives Mattel took
   advantage of to move into Valbonne Sophia Antipolis, legally the
   French office couldn't be closed; Mattel would have to find a buyer.
   So while all other Blue Sky Rangers were laid off in January 1984, the
   programmers in France stayed on the payroll, working on games that
   Mattel had no intention of releasing. Ultimately, Director Tim Scanlon
   found investors so the division could become independent. Renamed Nice
   Ideas, they continued videogame programming, selling games to INTV
   Corp. and Coleco, among others.


   STORMFRONT STUDIOS

   After Mattel Electronics, Don Daglow (Utopia) was a producer at
   Electronic Arts, then served as head of Brøderbund's Entertainment and
   Education division. In 1988, he founded his own company, Stormfront
   Studios. Stormfront, located in San Rafael, California, created the
   "Tony La Russa Baseball" series, the "Eagle Eye Mysteries" games,
   America Online's "Neverwinter Nights" multiplayer game and many
   others.

   Visit the Stormfront Studios website at www.stormfront.com.

     _________________________________________________________________


      ÚÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ¿
      ³Further Technical Information From The Blue Sky Rangers ³
      ÀÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÙ

The original General Instruments off-the-shelf design included the 2K
system ROM (the RO-3-9502) that would contain the operating system for
the unit.
 
A later idea, born at APh or Mattel, was to include another ROM (the
RO-3-9504) with a 2K library of common subroutines that the programmers
could utilize. (This includes a random number generator, frequently used
sound effects, scoring routines, etc.)
 
The system ROM contains the interrupt level code that controls the
timing and updating of information to the STIC and System RAM; for most
games, this is invisible to the programmer who doesn't have to worry
about it. But by changing the interrupt address, the programmer can
transfer control to his own interrupt code to gain direct control of the
STIC and System RAM, do whatever special functions that can only be done
at interrupt level (such as scrolling the screen), then transfer control
back to the routines in the system ROM.
 
At Mattel, we simply considered these two parts -- the operating system
and the library of subroutines -- as the Executive ROM. The fact that
it's physically located in two ROMs, plus some overflow code stuck into
the GROM chip, came about because of the last-minute addition of the
library and is irrelevent to the programmer. And, as I mentioned in the
eariler post, these two parts were combined into one ROM in the
Intellivision II (though it still overflows into GROM).
 
Since the Blue Sky Rangers were a programming group, we present the
information on the website from a programmer's view. Information about
the hardware is included when it has an impact on how to program a game,
or when it puts design features in context (such as why everytime a
device got an extra sound chip it also sprouted two extra hand
controller ports).
 
The RO-3-9503 chip in the Intellivision is the Graphics ROM (GROM) chip
covered on the website; the RO-3-9504 is the Executive ROM (exec), also
covered. The RO-3-9502 contains system code and data used by the 1610,
the STIC and the System RAM chip (which also controls bus timing). The
code in this chip is invisible to, and not accessible by, the
Intellivision game programmer, so it is not covered on the website. But
the next time we update that page, we'll stick in a parenthetical
comment about its existence.
 
On the Intellivision II, the EXEC code and this system code were
combined into a single RO-3-9506 ROM chip.
 

The Games ÃÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ
ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÙ

Games Published By Mattel Electronics ³
ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÙ


Action Network ³
ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÙ

                          INTELLIVISION ACTION NETWORK

   The Action and Space Action Networks featured arcade-style games. The
   Intellivision was introduced with the promise of a well-rounded
   library, but by late-1982 it became obvious that, responding to market
   demand, most of the new games then in development would wind up in the
   Action Network. Rather than continuing to point out the growing
   disparity between the Action and the, say, Children's Learning games
   (two titles and holding), Marketing quietly discontinued the network
   concept.

   All of the games on this page were released in Action Network red
   boxes, with the exception of Pinball. While Pinball had long
   been listed as an Action Network game, it was released in 1983 after
   the networks had been abandoned. Several of these games were also
   released under the Sears brand name in different packaging.

     _________________________________________________________________

                                 Armor Battle

   INTELLIVISION CARTRIDGE [#1121]
   Also released by Sears [#4975211]
   Produced by APh Technology Consultants for Mattel Electronics

   CATALOG DESCRIPTION
   Dust off your field glasses and scan the horizon for enemy tanks.
   There's one -- grinding its way out of the woods!

   You see each other at the same time. Both turrets swing toward their
   targets. Who will fire a split second sooner? And who will be reduced
   to a pile of rubble?

   When you've beaten your opponent, move on to a new battlefield. There
   are literally hundreds of new terrains to conquer!

   War may be nerve-wracking, but this is pure fun!

   PRODUCTION NOTE
   An M Network version of the game, called Armor Ambush, was released
   for the Atari 2600.

     _________________________________________________________________

                                  Sea Battle

   INTELLIVISION CARTRIDGE [#1818]
   Also released by Sears [#4975213]
   Produced by APh Technology Consultants for Mattel Electronics

   CATALOG DESCRIPTION
   Destroyers, battleships, submarines, minesweepers, and aircraft
   carriers! You're the Admiral, and your mission is to rid the seas of
   the enemy fleet.

   Start by setting a strategy. Lay invisible minefields where you think
   the big enemy ships will travel. But be careful, because the other
   Admiral is laying mines to foil you...

   Battle stations! Now you slug it out with shells, torpedoes, and naval
   tactics. Sleek battleships are waiting to pounce on sluggish
   minesweepers. You can't relax for a minute.

   But who worries about the torpedoes, you say. Full speed ahead!

   PRODUCTION NOTE
   An M Network version of the game, called High Seas (announced in some
   catalogs as Sea Battle), was announced for the Atari 2600 and
   completed, but never released due to poor test results. An Aquarius
   version was also announced, but never completed.

     _________________________________________________________________

                                   Sub Hunt

   INTELLIVISION CARTRIDGE [#3408]
   Working title: Submarine
   Produced by APh Technology Consultants for Mattel Electronics

   CATALOG DESCRIPTION
   You're at the periscope of a Nautilus class nuclear submarine, the
   last line of defense between the enemy and the fleet. Enemy PT boats
   drone around seeking you out. Meanwhile, enemy destroyers constantly
   jockey for depth-bombing position. You must keep you head to control
   depth, speed, direction and torpedoes. You have simultaneous periscope
   and satellite hrizon displays with compass readings to keep you afloat
   and the enemy at bay. If you do it, you should be immediately
   commissioned an Admiral in the U.S. Navy.

     * Simultaneous displays
     * One player game
     * Control depth, speed, and torpedo launch

     _________________________________________________________________

                          ADVANCED DUNGEONS & DRAGONS
                           CLOUDY MOUNTAIN Cartridge

   INTELLIVISION CARTRIDGE [#3410]
   AKA Adventure (working title), Dungeons & Dragons, D&D, ADVANCED
   DUNGEONS & DRAGONS Cartridge
   Based on the role-playing game by TSR Hobbies, Inc.
   Produced by APh Technology Consultants for Mattel Electronics

   CATALOG DESCRIPTION
   Take the wrong turn and you'll soon be staring at the biggest, meanest
   and most clever dragon you've ever imagined. You start out in a maze.
   But, this is no ordinary maze. It's revealed to you only a few feet at
   a time as you enter each new uncharted corridor. The maze scrolls: up,
   down, right and left. You don't know when it's going to take a turn --
   for the worse. That dangerous dragon could be between you and the
   treasure that you must find. Along your way you'll find a variety of
   objects to help you avoid the dragon. Based on the popular
   role-playing board game, this video version will provide you with many
   hours of enjoyment.

     One player game

     Game screen "scrolls" up and down, left to right

     Continually changing maze

   PRODUCTION HISTORY
   Because of its complexity, this was the first cartridge to go over the
   4K size limit; it was allocated a whopping 6K.

   Originally released as ADVANCED DUNGEONS & DRAGONS Cartridge, CLOUDY
   MOUNTAIN was added to the name later when ADVANCED DUNGEONS & DRAGONS
   TREASURE OF TARMIN Cartridge was announced.

   FUN FACT: The all-capitalization and the word "cartridge" are actually
   part of the title, as required by the contract with TSR Hobbies,
   owners of the Dungeons & Dragons trademark.

     _________________________________________________________________

                                   Explorer

   INTELLIVISION CARTRIDGE [unfinished]
   AKA Zork
   Produced by APh Technology Consultants for Mattel Electronics

   PRODUCTION HISTORY
   As indicated by its working title, this game was inspired by the text
   adventure game Zork. It didn't get too far; about the only record of
   it is in a December 10, 1981 status report written by Gabriel Baum, VP
   of Applications Software, after reviewing development at APh: "A new
   game closely paralleling Dungeons & Dragons. A man in a large cave
   searches for treasure, is attacked by beasts and defends himself or
   proceeds within the game using objects he collects. Currently only
   some graphics are defined." The game apparently was discontinued
   because it was too similar to the two Dungeons & Dragons cartridges
   already in development.

     _________________________________________________________________

                                     Snafu

   INTELLIVISION CARTRIDGE [#3758]
   Working titles: Blockade+Snakes, Ssssnakes!
   Program, Graphics and Sound: Mike Minkoff
   Music: Russ Lieblich

   CATALOG DESCRIPTION
   You each start off with little lines that start to grow.

   They grow fast, tangling, weaving, writhing like magic beanstalks. And
   you're at the controls, trying to completely enclose the other guy so
   he can't grow any more.

   This is a game of lightning quick strategic decisions. Hesitate...or
   slip...and you'll find yourself surrounded.

   PRODUCTION HISTORY
   Developed under the working title Blockade+Snakes to reflect the two
   basic versions of the game. In the first, inspired by the board game
   Blockade, opponents try to surround and trap each other. In the
   second, inspired by a handheld LED game in development at Mattel but
   never released, opponents bite at each other's tails until one is
   reduced to nothing.

   Mike liked the name Ssssnakes! and started using it on the title
   screen; he fought for it to be the final name. Marketing instead chose
   Snafu, from the military acronym "Situation Normal -- All Fouled Up"
   (actually, most veterans use a different word than "Fouled"). Mike
   hated the name since it had nothing to do with the gameplay.

   Snafu was the only game released to use the Intellivision video
   chip's colored squares mode.

   An Aquarius version of Snafu was also released.

   PLAYING TIPS: From Intellivision Game Club News, Issue 2, Winter 1982
   (credited to "Mike, another Intellivision programming specialist"):
     * Practice steering -- Get a good feel for the action of the
       direction disk.
     * Anticipate -- Concentrate on the moves of the opposing snakes as
       well as your own.
     * Plan ahead -- Press the direction disk JUST SLIGHTLY ahead of when
       you want to turn. If you wait too long, you won't be able to turn
       until the next avenue.
     * For the "trap" games -- try getting in front of the opposing
       snakes forcing them to the outside. If you're clever, you can
       create channels around the perimeter from which the opposing
       snakes cannot escape. Allow a snake back into the middle and you
       make it easier for it to double back to trap you.
     * For the "bite" games -- learn to read the rebounds. Be careful not
       to bite off your own tail by doubling back on yourself. Alternate
       between the horizontal, vertical and diagonal modes to cross up
       your opponent. Go on the defensive when you have only a few links
       left. This will give your snake time to grow new links. For a
       twist in strategy, go on the defensive right from the start. Grow
       extra links before you attack.

     _________________________________________________________________

                                 Triple Action

   INTELLIVISION CARTRIDGE [#3760]
   Working title: Arcade
   Produced by APh Technology Consultants for Mattel Electronics

   CATALOG DESCRIPTION
   It's three classic video games in one!

   Racing Cars -- You and your opponent race against the clock down a
   crowded highway.

   Battle Tanks -- It's a duel to the finish between two heavy tanks. One
   of you will end up as scrap iron.

   Biplanes -- It's a thrilling dogfight -- biplane style! Watch out for
   the control tower...don't get lost in the clouds. But most of all,
   watch out for that blood thirsty baron with a leather cap!

   PRODUCTION HISTORY
   Developed under the name Arcade, the cartridge was to contain five
   different arcade-type games. Space limitations forced this to be cut
   back to three. It's not clear what the lost two games were, but one of
   them may have been Brickout!, a clone of Atari's Breakout.

   FUN FACT: More hours were spent in the programming cubicles playing
   Biplanes than any other Intellivsion game. Although it's one of the
   simplest, many programmers felt it was the most challenging and fun of
   the two-person games. The first time you deliberately stall, go into a
   free fall, then pull out with a backward loop at the last second to
   blast your opponent at point-blank range is a joy!

   FUN FACT: So many hours were wasted on Biplanes, that when a memo was
   circulated April 1, 1982, ordering Triple Action deleted from
   programmers' hard disks, Biplanes-addict Steve Montero (Night
   Stalker) didn't argue; sheepishly, he erased it, only later
   discovering that the memo was an April Fool's hoax.

   FUN FACT: In Biplanes, although the game ends when one player reaches
   15 points, bullets in the air at that point are allowed to score. It's
   possible, therefore, to have a game with a 15-15 tie, or to win with
   16 points.

     _________________________________________________________________

                                   Brickout!

   INTELLIVISION CARTRIDGE [UNRELEASED]
   Produced by APh Technology Consultants for Mattel Electronics

   PRODUCTION HISTORY
   Brickout! was an Intellivision version of the Atari arcade and video
   game Breakout. Although the game was completed, it's unclear what
   plans Marketing had for it, since it's not included in any catalog or
   press release. It may have been intended for the Triple Action
   cartridge, which was originally to have included five arcade-type
   games. Brickout! may very well have been shelved for fear of legal
   action from Atari; such fears killed the original version of
   Astrosmash, which was an Asteroids-like game.

     _________________________________________________________________

                                   Frog Bog

   INTELLIVISION CARTRIDGE [#5301]
   Working title: Frogs
   Produced by APh Technology Consultants for Mattel Electronics

   CATALOG DESCRIPTION
   Sitting upon two lily pads in the middle of a lily pond are a pair of
   hungry frogs; one for you, one for your opponent. Overhead swarm
   delicious flies. Whether or not your frog scores his dinner while you
   rack up points is entirely up to you. You control the height and
   direction of his jump; even the flick of his long pink tongue. Leap
   too high or at the wrong angle and "Pl-op" your frog goes into the
   pond. He must swim back to his lily pad, taking away valuable scoring
   time while your opponent goes on racking up points. As play continues,
   night will come to the pond. Or, you can choose to play the entire
   round at night, leaping for fireflies -- in the dark.

     * One or two player game
     * Continuous scoring
     * Screen changes from day or night

   PRODUCTION NOTE
   An M Network version, called Frogs and Flies, was released for the
   Atari 2600.

     _________________________________________________________________

                                  Land Battle

   INTELLIVISION CARTRIDGE [#5302/UNRELEASED]
   Produced by APh Technology Consultants for Mattel Electronics
   Revised Graphics: Peggi Decarli

   PRODUCTION HISTORY
   This wargame simulation took a long time in programming (officially
   391 days, compared to 170 days for Night Stalker, begun at about
   the same time); when completed in mid-1982, Marketing was concerned
   that its design, similar to Sea Battle, already looked dated.

   A second concern was that, due to the complexity of the game, it
   required more memory than an Intellivision contained; the cartridge
   would have to include 256 bytes of RAM onboard. Only USCF Chess had
   been approved for onboard RAM, an expensive proposition.

   When the Entertainment Computer System (ECS) was given the green
   light, Gabriel Baum, VP of Applications Software, proposed changing
   Land Battle to an ECS title; the ECS had an additional 2K of RAM
   available for cartridges. Marketing resisted this -- they still wanted
   Land Battle as a stand-alone game. Peggi Decarli was assigned to give
   the game a graphics makeover.

   After the makeover, Marketing still didn't find it visually
   interesting enough. By that time, wargame fanatic Steve Sents, having
   completed Deadly Discs, had started work on an ECS wargame called
   Desert Fox, which Marketing liked the looks of better. The decision
   was made to kill Land Battle and incorporate as much of its gameplay
   and programming as possible into the Desert Fox design.

     _________________________________________________________________

                                 Night Stalker

   INTELLIVISION CARTRIDGE [#5305]
   Working Title: Attacker
   Design & Program: Steve Montero
   Graphics: Peter Allen
   Sound: Russ Lieblich

   CATALOG DESCRIPTION
   You're on the run. Your attackers are relentless robots. Destroy one
   and it's replaced by an even smarter, faster robot. It's a nightmare.
   Your only defenses are avoidance and weapons found somewhere in the
   labyrinth. When one weapon empties, you avoid robots to find another.
   Duck around a corner or go into your safe house. But, be careful.
   There are also people-size spiders and their webs to slow your escape.
   Bats also wing their way at you. If either spiders or bats bite you,
   you're stunned; easier prey for the robot attackers.

     * One player game
     * Realistic antagonists
     * Challenge increases as game progresses

   PRODUCTION HISTORY
   Steve Montero is an expert on robotics, so it was natural for him to
   program Night Stalker. In development late in 1981, the game was a
   favorite with other programmers, who didn't need their arms twisted to
   spend hours testing it. Unfortunately, the first time Marketing
   brought in some 12-year-old kid to try it out, he got further than any
   of the programmers had. A new, tougher robot had to be added to the
   game, at the cost of losing one of the best features: the spider's web
   (the game was only 4K in size). Originally, as the spider crawled
   around the maze it left a web that would slow you down considerably as
   you ran through it. You could shoot the web away, but you'd use up
   bullets. Without the web, the spider became like the bats: just a
   nuisance.

   After Night Stalker was finished, game cartridges began getting larger
   in size, so Steve proposed Ms. Night Stalker, a 12K sequel that would
   include the web and all the other features he had wanted, including
   multiple weapons (bazookas to blast through walls!), multiple
   scrolling mazes and smarter robots. Marketing shelved the idea and
   Steve was assigned to program Space Shuttle instead, which may
   have been a contributing factor toward Steve leaving Mattel and the
   game industry not long after.

   Mattel Electronics released M Network versions of Night Stalker for
   the Atari 2600, the Apple II and the IBM PC. (The Atari 2600 version
   was called Dark Caverns.) A version was also announced for the
   Aquarius, but was not completed.

   PLAYING TIPS: From Intellivision Game Club News, Issue 4, Winter 1983:

     * Carefully count how many bullets you have left. It's always wise
       to kill a robot with your last shot to give you time to get a new
       weapon.
     * In the beginning, shooting bats is a good way to rack up points.
       However, after 5,000 points, remember every bat that you hit turns
       into a Gray Robot.
     * Don't just concentrate on robots at higher point levels. The bats
       and spiders can sneak up on you when you're not watching.
     * When being followed by the White Robot, don't be afraid to use the
       bunker. Peek your head out and fire a quick shot at him and then
       duck inside for cover.
     * The only sure way to kill the Black Robot is to fire at him from
       point-blank range. Try ducking around a corner or come out of the
       bunker and fire off a quick shot. You have to be very close to
       make a direct hit.

   PLAYING TIPS: Night Stalker is a favorite of Blue Sky Ranger Steve
   Roney (Space Spartans, B-17 Bomber). He plays the game with a
   controller in each hand -- one to run, one to shoot -- since buttons
   and disk cannot be used simultaneously on one controller.

   Steve adds: "Another trick to bagging the later robots has to do with
   there being only one moving object available for the robot bullets. If
   you wait just above the place where the robot appears and dangle your
   feet where the robot can see, the robot will shoot below your feet.
   You can then safely drop down and quickly get off all three shots to
   nail the robot before his bullet gets all the way across the
   bottom!!!!"

   FUN FACT: Russ Lieblich was proud of his sound effects for Night
   Stalker, especially the constant heartbeat. Whenever he heard someone
   playing the game, he'd run into their cubicle, grab the volume control
   on the TV, and turn it up full.

     _________________________________________________________________

                                    Pinball

   INTELLIVISION CARTRIDGE [#5356]
   Design & Program: Minh Chou Tran, Bob Newstadt
   Graphics: Peggi Decarli, Monique Lujan-Bakerink
   Sound: Mark Urbaniec

   CATALOG DESCRIPTION
   A challenging and exciting video version of the time-honored Pinball
   machine you find in arcades. You get it all -- five balls, flippers,
   two- player scores, with all the sounds and action of the real thing.
   If you've ever "tilted" a real pinball machine, try our Pinball.
   You're in for some surprises and a whale of a lot of fun.

     * One or two player game
     * Realistic arcade action
     * Authentic sounds

   PRODUCTION HISTORY
   Pinball was in production longer than any other Intellivision game --
   well over two years. Chou Tran, who started the game, could never get
   the ball motion debugged. Finally, Bob Newstadt was assigned to help
   her. He got the motion problems worked out, then he and Chou expanded
   the design from it's original single screen to its final multi-screen
   layout.

   Although originally announced as part of the red-boxed Action Network,
   the game was released in 1983, after the "network" concept was
   dropped. Pinball was released in a purple box.

     _________________________________________________________________

                               TRON Deadly Discs

   INTELLIVISION CARTRIDGE [#5391]
   AKA TRON I, Deadly Discs
   Based on the Disney motion picture TRON
   Design & Program: Steve Sents
   Graphics: Eric Wels
   Sound: Bill Goodrich

   CATALOG DESCRIPTION
   Our hero, TRON, is locked in battle against the Evil Blue Warriors.
   Score points by knocking out the computer-controlled attackers with
   flying discs. Your task is to bring your man safely through battle
   after battle. The attacking warriors are also armed with destroyer
   discs, and they'll come after TRON in wave after wave. You get them,
   or they'll get TRON!

     * One player game
     * Intense strategy and action
     * Richocheting discs

   PRODUCTION HISTORY
   TRON Deadly Discs was in production at the same time as TRON, the
   Disney movie; the design for the game was based on storyboards and
   production stills from the film.

   Mattel Electronics bet a lot of dough that the movie would be a
   phenomenon. A state-of-the-art special effect film about video games,
   the hottest trend in the country -- how could it miss? Well, it did.
   The lukewarm reception the movie received did little to boost interest
   in the six TRON games Mattel released (four originals, two
   conversions). TRON Deadly Discs, though, was a strong enough game in
   its own right to garner good reviews and word-of-mouth; it went on to
   sell over 300,000 copies -- a respectable number, but only about a
   third what Marketing was hoping for. Ironically, the original
   production run was planned to be 350,000, but at the last minute it
   was increased to 800,000. "The reason for the increase," explained
   Marketing man Dick Baumbusch in a June 1, 1982 memo, "is due to the
   anticipated popularity of the Tron film and the fact that we will
   feature it in a commercial this Fall. Also, the international demand
   for Tron will limit any downside risk." It was this type of
   forecasting that put Intellivision where it is today.

   In answer to a frequent question, there was no connection between the
   production of Mattel's TRON video games and the arcade games TRON and
   Discs of TRON. A separate company had licensed the arcade rights to
   the movie and there was no communication between them and Mattel.

   Early catalogs listed TRON Deadly Discs (under its working title TRON
   I) as a Space Action Network cartridge; it was actually released as
   part of the Action Network.

   An M Network Atari 2600 version and an Aquarius version were also
   released.

   BUG: There is a trick that pretty much lets you rack up unlimited
   points, as first pointed out in a letter Mattel received November 3,
   1982 from Steven M. Little, an Intellivision owner in Minneapolis:
   "Once you are able to open the top left and top right doors, which
   enables you to go in one door and out the other...just step out the
   right top or left top door and stay there...90% of the enemy discs go
   through you and your man is not hit or destroyed. If you stay at that
   position, you can reach a score of 1,000,000 very easily by just
   breaking the enemy's discs and...throwing your disc just enough to
   keep only one enemy on the board at all times. Once you reach close to
   a million points, don't destroy any more warriors. Just hold your disc
   in the block mode and break discs. If you do get hit just go back and
   forth for repair. (Never throw disc to destroy warrior for you may get
   a replacement that carries the stick.) I went from 1,000,000 to
   10,000,000 with no problem."

   PLAYING TIPS: From Intellivision Game Club News, Issue 5, Spring 1983:

     * Keep moving because a moving target is hard to hit. Try to line up
       a shot where the Warrior is in front of an open door. That way you
       can de-rezz the attacker and jam open the door with just one disc.
     * When a leader Warrior appears (dark blue), concentrate all of your
       shots at him since the Warriors become quicker and more accurate
       when he is on the game grid.
     * To knock out the Recognizer, run to the very top center of the
       grid. From this position, you have a good chance of making a
       direct hit on his eye. However, in this position, you are very
       vulnerable to the Paralyzer Probe. Take aim, throw your disc
       quickly, and run out of the path of the Probe.

   PLAYING TIP: This is the favorite Intellivision game of Blue Sky
   Ranger David Warhol (Mind Strike). He plays with one controller in
   each hand -- one for maneuvering (thumb on disc), one for throwing
   (thumb on keypad). "If you like Deadly Discs with one hand controller,
   you'll love it with two," he says. "Try it now and thank me later."

   EASTER EGG: Deadly Discs fan Dave Warhol put together his own private
   version of the game, replacing the enemy warriors with the hot dogs
   from BurgerTime. He called the result Deadly Dogs. If you want to play
   it, it's hidden in the INTV Corporation release of Dig Dug: press 47
   (4 and 7 simultaneously) on both hand controllers and press reset. The
   Deadly Dogs title screen will appear.

     _________________________________________________________________

                               TRON Maze-A-Tron

   INTELLIVISION CARTRIDGE [#5392]
   AKA TRON II, Mazatron, Maze-A-Tron
   Based on the Disney motion picture TRON
   Design & Program: Russ Haft
   Graphics: Eric Wels
   Sound: Andy Sells

   CATALOG DESCRIPTION
   Based on the Disney movie TRON, this is a great action game for 1 or 2
   players. You are engaged in a deadly struggle to penetrate the inner
   circle of the Master Control Program. Watch out for the deadly "bits."
   You've got to destroy them to reach your goal and accumulate the most
   points.

   PRODUCTION HISTORY
   Like TRON Deadly Discs, this game's production paralleled the
   production of the movie. And like TRON Deadly Discs, the movie's
   less-than-enthusiastic reception didn't help sales.

   Note: Despite what the above catalog description says, TRON
   Maze-A-Tron is a one-player game.

     _________________________________________________________________

                                Lock 'N' Chase

   INTELLIVISION CARTRIDGE [#5637]
   Based on the Data East arcade game
   Program: Mike Winans, Julie Hoshizaki
   Graphics: Peggi Decarli
   Sound: Bill Goodrich

   CATALOG DESCRIPTION
   A fast-action chase game as you maneuver your thief through the maze,
   picking up coins and other treasures. Billy-club swinging cops are in
   hot pursuit, but you can temporarily escape them by locking gates
   behind you. The longer you survive, the more valuable the treasures
   become. One or two players.

   PRODUCTION HISTORY
   Lock 'N' Chase was the first in a series of conversions based on Data
   East arcade games, a series that eventually would include Bump 'N'
   Jump, BurgerTime, Mission X, Thin Ice (based on the arcade game Disco
   No. 1) and the unreleased PizzaTime (a BurgerTime sequel). The
   association carried over to INTV Corporation, which did Commando and
   Diner (another BurgerTime sequel).

   Mike Winans almost killed himself trying to fit the game into 4K. He
   finally proclaimed it couldn't be done and, reluctantly, 6K was
   authorized. Mike managed to just squeeze it into the 6K, although the
   control of Lupin wasn't ideal. (In the arcade game, the thief is named
   Lupin, a nice touch of personality that Mattel left out of our
   version.)

   When the game was released, press and customers complained about how
   difficult it was to control Lupin. (You had to time turns precisely,
   or Lupin would stop dead.) The problem was considered bad enough that
   a running change was ordered: after the 6K cartridges were sold out,
   improved 8K versions would be released. By this time, Mike had
   transferred to the Design & Development department, so Julie Hoshizaki
   was assigned to make the improvement. The improved versions aren't
   marked on the package; the easiest way to tell if you have an improved
   version is to watch what happens when a cop catches Lupin. In the
   arcade game, Lupin collapses into his hat -- an animation there wasn't
   room for in the 6K version. The collapsing animation is in the 8K
   version.

   M Network Atari 2600 and Apple II versions were also released. IBM PC
   and Aquarius versions were announced, but never completed.

   FUN FACT: An insignificant typo almost caused Mattel to dump tens of
   thousands of dollars of perfectly good ROMs and to delay the release
   of Lock 'N' Chase by several months. Why? First, some background:

   The legal department required programmers to include an ASCII
   copyright notice somewhere in every game so that it could be read if
   someone dumped the cartridge's object code. Traditionally, if there
   was room, the programmer would also include his or her name. (It was
   forbidden to hide your name in the game such that it could ever show
   up on screen, but object code was OK.) For Lock 'N' Chase, Mike
   included his, Peggi's, and Bill's name in the code. The day the game
   was to be shipped to the ROM factory, the three of them went to lunch
   to celebrate. At lunch, Mike realized for the first time that Peggi's
   last name is spelled "Decarli." He had spelled it "de Carli" in the
   code. No problem; he went back after lunch, corrected it, then bid
   everyone farewell and went off to his new job in Design & Development.

   What Mike didn't know was that Bill Fisher, who was in charge of
   coordinating with the factory, had copied the finished game off of
   Mike's hard disk during lunch and shipped it out.

   Three months later, ten thousand plus ROMs were finished. Sample chips
   were sent back from the factory. Bill loaded one into a ROM reader,
   then compared the chip's checksum to the checksum of the archived
   version on Mike's hard disk. To Bill's horror, they didn't match.
   There was a bug in the ROMs!

   Programmers started playing the game for hours on end, trying to see
   how bad the bug was -- would the game crash? Marketing needed to know
   instantly if the game was releasable. Should they toss out tens of
   thousands of dollars worth of chips and lose at least three months
   time, or should they risk the bad publicity of sending out a
   bug-filled version?

   Finally, after a couple days of panic and anxiety, they asked Mike to
   come up from Design & Development to help track down the bug. After
   working on the problem for awhile, he slowly remembered lunch that day
   three months earlier. Learning how to spell Peggi's name....

   Mike went to the archived version of the game, changed "Decarli" back
   to "de Carli" and recompiled the program. Now the checksums matched.
   Crisis averted, the cartridges went out.

     _________________________________________________________________

                                  Sharp Shot

   INTELLIVISION CARTRIDGE [#5638]
   Working Titles: Poww, Zzap!
   Produced by APh Technology Consultants for Mattel Electronics

   CATALOG DESCRIPTION
   An exciting new target shooting game specially designed for children.
   There are four different shooting ranges for one or two players. Hit
   the pass receiver. Shoot down the spinning spacecraft. Bomb Navy
   ships. Fire at the maze monsters. Challenging action for video game
   beginners.

   PRODUCTION HISTORY
   These four single-button games were originally programmed by APh for a
   TV game show -- contestants controlled the single fire button by
   saying "Pow!" With no advance notice, APh sent over these four games
   stitched into one with the intention that Mattel release it as a
   children's cartridge. Since Mattel by contract had to buy a certain
   amount of product each year from APh, Marketing agreed to release the
   cartridge, over the objections of Gabriel Baum, VP of Application
   Software.

   Gabriel particularly objected to the packaging. In a memo to Marketing
   (August 31, 1982), he wrote: "...the packaging and instructions do not
   in any way indicate that the game and graphic content of the cartridge
   is extremely simplistic...I believe that Mattel Electronics is going
   to be exposed to very unfavorable comment when consumers discover that
   the quality of the cartridge is in many ways reminiscent of early
   Atari games." In answer to this memo, Marketing had a label added to
   the front of the package reading, "Specially designed game for
   children over 4."

   An M Network Atari 2600 version of the game was also submitted by APh.
   It was rejected.

     _________________________________________________________________

                                 Shark! Shark!

   INTELLIVISION CARTRIDGE [#5787]
   Working Title: Shark
   Design & Program: Ji-Wen Tsao
   Sound & Music: Andy Sells

   CATALOG DESCRIPTION
   It's survival of the fittest in the deep, dark waters of the ocean.
   And you're just a little fish! You must eat smaller fish to stay alive
   and grow. But you're not the only one struggling for survival. Bigger
   fish are out to eat you. Beware, the most feared predator of all is on
   your tail. Shark, Shark! One or two-player action.

   PRODUCTION HISTORY
   Marketing totally dismissed Shark! Shark! as an inconsequential kiddie
   game and was reluctant to release it. It had one of the smallest
   initial shipments of any Intellivision game -- only 5,600 copies in
   1982 (compared to nearly 800,000 for the heavily advertised Star
   Strike). So, of course, there were almost no copies in the stores when
   Shark! Shark! went on to become one of the best reviewed Intellivision
   games ever ("Shark! Shark! is an original. A must cartridge for
   Intellivision owners...positively delightful...certainly one of the
   finest cartridges for this system." -- Videogaming Illustrated, June
   1983).

   BUG: Due to a timing error in the Intellivision II, the bubble
   sounds don't have their full effect when the cartridge is played on
   that system.

   FUN FACT: Everyone thought it would be a great gag to use the song
   Mack the Knife ("Oh, the shark, babe, has such teeth, dear...") for
   the "game over" music. Andy Sells put together a hilarious arrangement
   of the song which was used in the prototype version, while the Mattel
   crack legal team looked into getting clearance to use it. We had never
   licensed a song before, so they weren't used to tracking down rights,
   but they finally found the owner: Warner Communications...parent
   company of Atari. Andy wrote an original tune to use instead.

     _________________________________________________________________

Strategy Network ³
ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÙ

   The Strategy Network cartridges were based on classic board games,
   with the exception of the original title Utopia. Each of these games
   could be played against a computer player; Marketing liked to hold up
   these games as proof of the "Intelligent" in "Intellivision."

   Strategy Network cartridges were released in purple boxes.
   Backgammon and Checkers were also released under the Sears
   brand name in different packaging. Checkers was released with
   different packaging in Great Britain under the English name Draughts.

     _________________________________________________________________

                                ABPA Backgammon

   INTELLIVISION CARTRIDGE [#1119]
   Trademark used under license from American Backgammon Players
   Association
   Also released by Sears as Backgammon
   Produced by APh Technology Consultants for Mattel Electronics

   CATALOG DESCRIPTION
   Beating Intellivision at backgammon is a lot of fun. But it's
   definitely not child's play.

   The computer knows all the tricks -- and it calculates all the odds
   before it moves.

   Can you find a flaw in its strategy? Can you give it pieces to gobble
   up freely, then trap it in the back game? Or will you just cross your
   fingers, press the button and roll the dice?

   Perfect your own backgammon skills with this modem version of one of
   the world's oldest games.

   PRODUCTION NOTES
   ABPA Backgammon was one of the original four games introduced with
   Intellivision when it was test marketed in 1979.

   The program code was recycled in the Triple Challenge cartridge
   released by INTV Corporation.

     _________________________________________________________________

                                   Checkers

   INTELLIVISION CARTRIDGE [#1120]
   Also released by Sears
   Released by Mattel in Great Britain as Draughts [#1120]
   Produced by APh Technology Consultants for Mattel Electronics

   CATALOG DESCRIPTION
   Pit your skill and imagination against an opponent who can assess the
   board opposition in a few seconds and think several moves ahead.

   The computer won't make a foolish mistake, but you can still beat
   it...if you concoct a strategy it can't handle.

     * Hi and Lo skill levels
     * "Bail Out" button asks computer to recommend your next move

   PRODUCTION NOTES
   The game Checkers is known as Draughts in Great Britain, necessitating
   a packaging change for the English market.

   The program code was recycled in the Triple Challenge cartridge
   released by INTV Corporation.

     _________________________________________________________________

                                   Takeover

   INTELLIVISION CARTRIDGE [UNRELEASED]
   AKA Empire
   Produced by APh Technology Consultants for Mattel Electronics

   PRODUCTION HISTORY
   Essentially an Intellivision version of the war/strategy board game
   Risk, Takeover was well-liked among the programmers. Unfortunately,
   the game used the same colored-squares graphics mode used by
   Snafu, limiting the screen graphics to colored blocks, plus the
   eight moving objects. Marketing felt that while the game was good, it
   looked too boring to be a successful seller. The game was never
   released.

     _________________________________________________________________

                                  USCF Chess

   INTELLIVISION CARTRIDGE [#2611]
   Trademark used under license from U.S. Chess Federation
   AKA: Chess
   Heuristics programming: Teletape, Inc.
   User interface programming: Russ Ludwick
   Graphics: Dave James, Peggi Decarli

   CATALOG DESCRIPTION
   A great new way to play the ultimate game of strategy, whether you're
   a novice, intermediate or expert. Pit your skill against the computer
   or an opponent. Select from eight degrees of difficulty and a time
   limit on moves. Move up in skill as you improve.

   PRODUCTION HISTORY
   A good Chess program was beyond the capabilities of the both the
   Intellivision hardware and the Intellivision programmers, but
   Marketing felt that it was a must-have title to establish the
   Intellivision as more than a toy.

   Money was authorized to produce the Chess cartridges with 2K of RAM on
   board to bolster the insufficient 147 available bytes in the Master
   Component. No other Mattel Intellivision cartridge was released with
   on-board RAM.

   The gameplay programming was farmed out to Teletape, Inc., a company
   with experience in Artificial Intelligence. In-house, Russ Ludwick
   programmed the onscreen display and user interface.

   Although on the schedule from early on, the technical difficulties
   (including a record 19 weeks of testing and debugging) held up release
   of the cartridge until 1983. When finally released, it did receive the
   good reviews Marketing was looking for.

   The program code was recycled in the Triple Challenge cartridge
   released by INTV Corporation.

   FUN FACT: Russ tested the program by playing countless games against
   the cartridge at all levels. He found that when playing at the highest
   levels, the cartridge was good, but slow. He got in the habit of
   making a move, then going home and letting the Intellivision think
   about a response overnight. Because of this, three features were
   added: (1) the normal Intellivision time-out feature was disabled, (2)
   a feature letting you switch to an easier level in the middle of a
   move was added, and (3) a warning that moves at higher levels could
   take hours -- or days --was put into the instruction book.

     _________________________________________________________________

                                    Utopia

   INTELLIVISION CARTRIDGE [#5149]
   Working title: Island
   Design, program, graphics: Don Daglow
   Sound: Russ Lieblich

   CATALOG DESCRIPTION
   You and your opponent each have an island to rule. Points are
   accumulated based on the welfare of your island people. You can choose
   to be a benevolent ruler or an aggressive dictator. Your people need
   food, housing, and industry for clothing and other essentials. What
   you cannot manage are natural disasters. A single hurricane could wipe
   out your crops, sink your fishing fleet, destroy all the homes and
   factories you've built. Rebels may automatically appear should the
   welfare of the people drop. They could attack. Classic dilemmas in a
   game that is sure to become an absorbing classic in its own right.

     * One or two can play, either competitively or cooperatively.
     * Colorful computer graphics and special sound effects.
     * Computer measures your people's well being through a sophisticated
       scoring system that weighs ALL island conditions.

   PRODUCTION HISTORY
   In college, Don Daglow had been a fan of main-frame computer
   simulation games; he had little interest in arcade games. So it was
   only natural that he would try a simulation game for the
   Intellivision. His result, Utopia, was hailed by reviewers for its
   originality: it wasn't another arcade rip-off, and it wasn't just a
   video version of an existing game or sport. It was even educational
   without being boring.

   Although Marketing didn't put much of a push behind the game (they
   preferred graphically splashier, no-brainer games like Star
   Strike), the reviews and word of mouth pushed sales to a respectable
   250,000.

   Today, Utopia is one of the best-remembered Intellivision game, with
   some people referring to it as Civilization 0.5, a reference to Sid
   Meier's later breakthrough computer simulation game.

   An Aquarius version was also released.

     _________________________________________________________________

                                    Reversi

   INTELLIVISION CARTRIDGE [#5304]
   Working title: Othello
   Produced by APh Technology Consultants for Mattel Electronics

   CATALOG DESCRIPTION
   Three levels of difficulty insure you'll be playing Reversi for a
   long, long time. Your objective is to take control of the board. Your
   opponent is either another player or the computer. Either way, it's
   great fun. As the game progresses, the playing pieces switch from
   black to white or white to black depending on which player takes
   control. Your score is continuously displayed on the screen.

     * One or two player game
     * Three difficulty levels
     * Three board sizes

   PRODUCTION HISTORY
   Reversi is an old board game that seems to make a reappearance every
   generation or so. In the late seventies, it had regained popularity
   from one toy company under the trademark Othello.

   Atari licensed the name Othello for a video game version, but the game
   itself was in public domain, so Mattel also did a version. In trying
   to come up with a title for it, Mattel discovered that the classic
   name of the game, Reversi, had never been trademarked. So Reversi (TM
   Mattel) became the name of the cartridge.

     _________________________________________________________________


Sports Network ³
ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÙ


                  INTELLIVISION SPORTS NETWORK

   No doubt about it, these are the games that first sold the
   Intellivision. An early TV commercial showing a side-by-side
   comparison of baseball played on an Atari 2600 and on an Intellivsion
   made the Atari version look laughable. The Intellivision was
   established as the serious sports-game machine, and Major League
   Baseball went on to become the best-selling Intellivision cartridge.

   Mostly programmed for Mattel Electronics by APh Technology
   Consultants in 1979 and 1980, the games are impressive, especially
   when keeping in mind that all of them (except for Motocross,
   World Championship Baseball and the unfinished Basketball II)
   are only 4K in size. Also, most of these games require more than seven
   players and a ball to appear on screen at the same time -- difficult
   since the Intellivision can only draw eight moving objects on screen.
   Tricky swapping of players from static background drawings to moving
   objects and back achieves the illusion of more than eight moving at
   once.

   The main drawback to these games is that most require two players. By
   1981, work was starting on second-generation sports games that
   featured computer opponents; several of these were eventually released
   by INTV Corporation.

   The Sports Network games released by Mattel were in royal blue boxes
   (with the exception of Motocross, which was released after the
   themed "network" concept had been dropped). Several of these games
   were also released under the Sears brand name in different packaging.
   All of these games first appeared in 1980 except Bowling and
   Boxing, which came out in 1981, and Motocross, which was
   finally shipped in 1983. World Championship Baseball was released
   by INTV Corp. in 1985.

     _________________________________________________________________

                                  Auto Racing

   INTELLIVISION CARTRIDGE [#1113]
   Also released by Sears
   Produced by APh Technology Consultants for Mattel Electronics

   CATALOG DESCRIPTION
   Snap on your crash helmet, fire up your Formula I, and slam it into
   first. Power through the first turn and you're off on a Grand Prix
   class racing circuit.

   The faster you push your race car the more alert you have to be. You
   may slide off the track and into a maze of grass and trees. You may
   find yourself skidding into a pond. Or you may find yourself halfway
   through a hairpin turn before you know it.

   Whether you race against an opponent or against the clock, there are
   thrills enough for anybody

     * Five different race cars
     * Five different race courses
     * One or two players

   DEVELOPMENT HISTORY: There were two versions of Auto Racing released
   due to a running change made during manufacturing. In the original
   version, steering is realistic -- it is oriented to the car. For
   example, if your car is moving downward onscreen and you want to turn
   right (that is, toward the left of the screen), you press right on the
   hand controller disc. Mattel received complaints about how difficult
   this was (even the instruction book warns that it takes some getting
   used to), so a running change was ordered to make steering intuitive
   -- to orient it to the screen. In the above example, to turn toward
   the left of the screen, you press left on the hand controller disc,
   even though the car is actually making a right.

   Both versions had their advocates -- intuitive steering being easier
   to play; realistic steering being a better simulation of driving. One
   programmer likened it to the difference between driving an automatic
   and driving a stick. Unfortunately, there's no way to tell which
   version is which from the package; you either have to check the
   instruction book, or just plug in the cartridge and play.

   FUN FACT: The five courses are mapped on a globe; you can drive off
   one, through the trees, and onto another, or onto the hidden drag
   strip. Drive off at the right place and the trees are spaced so that,
   without touching the hand controller, your car will circle the globe
   forever (well, until the screen-saver times out).

     _________________________________________________________________

                                  NHL Hockey

   INTELLIVISION CARTRIDGE [#1114]
   Trademark used under license from NHL Services, Inc.
   Also released by Sears as Hockey
   Produced by APh Technology Consultants for Mattel Electronics

   CATALOG DESCRIPTION
   Your opponent has a man in the penalty box, so it's time to push hard
   on offense. There's the whistle! Time to move down the ice. Your team
   mows toward the opposing goal in perfect formation, nudging the puck
   back and forth as defenders move in.

   You're across the blue line. You send a pass across the front of the
   goal, then...wham! a screaming slap shot whips past the goalie and in
   for the score.

   The crowd roars its approval. And the buzzer announces the end of the
   game. You won! A little practice and you'll be ready for the big time.
     * Two players
     * Face offs, trapping, interception, penalty box

   PRODUCTION NOTE
   NHL Hockey was one of the games to be included on the Go For the Gold
   album cartridge.

     _________________________________________________________________

                                    Tennis

   INTELLIVISION CARTRIDGE [#1814]
   Also released by Sears
   Produced by APh Technology Consultants for Mattel Electronics

   CATALOG DESCRIPTION
   Thunk! You send a screaming serve across the net. Your opponent races
   to intercept it and returns a lofty lob into your deep backcourt. You
   get to it in time to send a smashing ground shot just out of reach of
   your opponent's outstretched racquet.

   Play an entire three set match, and each game will be different and
   exciting. You control ball placement, velocity and strategy. And it's
   a game of wits as well as of dexterity. Even the crowd gets in the act
   by turning their heads to follow the ball -- and cheering at just the
   right time.

     * Two players
     * Full three set matches
     * Control ball velocity and placement

     _________________________________________________________________

                                  NASL Soccer

   INTELLIVISION CARTRIDGE [#1683]
   Trademark used under license from NASL Marketing, Inc.
   Also released by Sears as Soccer
   Produced by APh Technology Consultants for Mattel Electronics

   CATALOG DESCRIPTION
   A well executed drive down the soccer field is a thing of beauty. The
   man with the ball jukes, whirls, passes to his teammate. The teammate
   dribbles toward the goal until he attracts a crowd of opponents. Then
   he passes to a third man who sets up the score.

   The game action is as realistic as the excitement of Pro Soccer --
   minus the black 'n blue shins.
     * Two players
     * Corner kicks, goal kicks, free kicks
     * Realistic action and sound effects

   PRODUCTION NOTE
   An M Network Atari 2600 version, called International Soccer, was
   released.

     _________________________________________________________________

                                   PGA Golf

   INTELLIVISION CARTRIDGE [#1816]
   Trademark used under license from the Professional Golfers'
   Association of America
   Also released by Sears as Golf
   Produced by APh Technology Consultants for Mattel Electronics

   CATALOG DESCRIPTION
   Stand steady at the tee...head down...slow backswing. Now, drive your
   tee shot 220 yards down the fairway, splitting a pair of sandtraps.
   Loft a five iron onto the green. And sink a twenty foot putt for a
   birdie!

   You control the swing and aim throughout 9 championship quality holes.
   The fairways and greens are beautifully manicured, but the sand traps
   are deep...and the rough is...rough!

     * Up to four players
     * 9 holes
     * 9 clubs
     * Realistic sound effects

     _________________________________________________________________

                             U.S. Ski Team Skiing

   INTELLIVISION CARTRIDGE [#1817]
   Trademark used under license of the United States Ski Team, Inc.
   Also released by Sears as Skiing [#4975219]
   Re-released by INTV Corp. as Alpine Skiing [INTV #1817]
   Produced by APh Technology Consultants for Mattel Electronics

   CATALOG DESCRIPTION
   Take a deep breath, dig your poles hard into the snow, push off...and
   you're speeding down a world class skiing course.

   Stay low and glide gracefully through the turns because you're in a
   race against the clock. But don't cut the comers too sharply or you'll
   go tumbling! All the excitement of the Winter Olympics on a beautiful
   video snowscape.

     * Up to six players
     * Downhill and slalom course
     * Jump moguls, edge through turns, race downhill

   PRODUCTION NOTE
   U.S. Ski Team Skiing was one of the games to be included on the Go For
   the Gold album cartridge.

   FUN FACT: A couple years after the game was finished, a Mattel
   programmer needed to take a look at the original APh source code. He
   was startled to find that all variables and subroutines were named
   with the vilest (and most creative) obscenities.

     _________________________________________________________________

                                    Boxing

   INTELLIVISION CARTRIDGE [#1819]
   Also released by Sears
   Produced by APh Technology Consultants for Mattel Electronics

   CATALOG DESCRIPTION
   Slip into the powerfully muscled body of the fighter of your choice.
   Maybe you'll go for a power slugger. Or an agile defender. Or a
   completely unpredictable fighter.

   There's the bell! You're playing at championship speed, so the action
   is lightning fast. Feint, duck, block, then move in for a quick
   combination.

   Remember that your fighter is using up precious energy. And each punch
   he takes has its toll. So use your brains as well as your brawn -- and
   keep your warrior in shape to go 15 rounds.

     * Two players
     * Four skill levels
     * Six different boxers
     * 15 rounds, KO's, point decisions, endurance limits

   PRODUCTION NOTE
   Boxing was one of the games to be included on the Go For the Gold
   album cartridge.

     _________________________________________________________________

                                 NFL Football

   INTELLIVISION CARTRIDGE [#2610]
   Trademark used under license of National Football League Properties,
   Inc.
   Also released by Sears as Football
   Produced by APh Technology Consultants for Mattel Electronics

   CATALOG DESCRIPTION
   The whistle blows! The crowd roars! The two teams sprint onto the
   field and line up for the opening kickoff.

   Your ball, first and ten on the twenty yard line. Will you grind out
   the yardage on the ground...or risk a long bomb for a quick score? You
   and your opponent can choose from over 180 offensive and defensive
   plays -- so it's as much a game of strategy as execution.

   Two full halves of fun. With all the refinements of passing, punting,
   end runs and razzle-dazzles. The computer keeps track of time and
   score, and the crowd lets you know what it thinks of your performance.

     * Two players
     * Call realistic offensive and defensive plays
     * Scoreboard monitors downs, yards to go, time outs, time remaining,
       and score

   PRODUCTION NOTE
   An M Network Atari 2600 version, called Super Challenge Football, was
   released.

     _________________________________________________________________

                             Major League Baseball

   INTELLIVISION CARTRIDGE [#2614]
   Trademark used under license of Major League Baseball Promotion Corp.
   Also released by Sears as Baseball
   Re-released by INTV Corp. as Big League Baseball [INTV #2614]
   Produced by APh Technology Consultants for Mattel Electronics

   CATALOG DESCRIPTION
   The crowd roars as the nine man home team sprints out onto the field.
   Then you and your opponent use all the tricks in the book to score the
   winning run.

   You control all the action -- balls and strikes, hit and run, double
   plays and stolen bases. And it's not over until the last out of the
   ninth inning!

     * Two players
     * Nine full innings
     * Control pitching, fielding, base running, batting

   DEVELOPMENT HISTORY
   Developed at APh during 1979, Major League Baseball came out in 1980
   and went on to become the best selling Intellivision cartridge, with
   1,085,700 shipped as of June 4, 1983 (the last date for which figures
   are available). After Mattel Electronics went out of business,
   INTV Corp. changed the name of the cartridge to Big League
   Baseball rather than pay to renew the Major League Baseball trademark
   license.

   An M Network Atari 2600 version, called Super Challenge Baseball, was
   released.

   FUN FACT: Major League Baseball is the only cartridge to use the
   Intellivision sound chip for speech synthesis (the umpire crying "Yer
   out!"). Marketing put a stop to any further such use, fearing it would
   hurt sales of the Intellivoice module.

     _________________________________________________________________

                                NBA Basketball

   INTELLIVISION CARTRIDGE [#2615]
   Trademark used under license of NBA Properties, Inc. and the National
   Basketball Association
   Also released by Sears as Basketball [#4975203]
   Produced by APh Technology Consultants for Mattel Electronics

   CATALOG DESCRIPTION
   Two teams square off at mid-court. Up they go for the jump ball. It's
   tipped to your team. You fake, drive, and move in for a slam dunk!

   Each three man team of remarkably realistic athletes can dribble. Pass
   in any direction, jump, block, steal...even take a casual set shot
   when they've caught the other guys napping.

   Four action-packed quarters -- plus overtime when needed!

     * Pass, steal, rebound, fast break, jump or set shot
     * Two players

   PRODUCTION NOTE
   NBA Basketball was one of the games to be included on the Go For the
   Gold album cartridge.

     _________________________________________________________________

                                  PBA Bowling

   INTELLIVISION CARTRIDGE [#3333]
   Trademark used under license of Professional Bowlers' Association
   Also released by Sears as Bowling [#4975223]
   Program, graphics: Rick Levine, Mike Minkoff
   Sound: John Sohl

   CATALOG DESCRIPTION
   Warm up by picking up some tricky spares. Now you're ready for ten
   frames of championship bowling. Select the bail weight you prefer.
   Decide how "slick" you want the alley. Take a few deep breaths
   and...you're up!

   Aim carefully allowing for loft and curve. Release nice and smooth,
   and watch the ball plunge into the sweet part of the pocket. Strike!
   Keep it up, score 200, and you'll get a rousing fanfare.

     * Up to four players
     * Nine ball weights
     * Ten alley speeds
     * Licensed by The Professional Bowlers Association

   DEVELOPMENT HISTORY
   PBA Bowling was the first Intellivision game actually programmed by
   Mattel employees: Mike Minkoff and Rick Levine from the handheld-games
   department. Since Mattel didn't have development equipment yet (1980),
   Mike and Rick commuted from Mattel in Hawthorne to APh in Pasadena
   three days a week. Mike gives Rick, an avid bowler, credit for the
   many realistic details in the game.

     _________________________________________________________________

                                   Motocross

   INTELLIVISION CARTRIDGE [#3411]
   AKA MX
   Design: Rick Koenig, Rick Levine
   Program: Rick Koenig
   Graphics: Rick Levine, Joe Ferreira
   Sound: Mark Urbaniec

   PACKAGE DESCRIPTION
   Speeding up the long straights, blasting through tight S turns, or
   hurling across wild jumps, you're meant to eat dirt and claim victory!
   What a racing bike you've got! The competition is fierce, the terrain
   is rough. Challenge your toughest adversary, then leave him behind, as
   you cross the finish line!
     * For one or two players!
     * Three rugged, exciting racing courses to choose from. And another
       you can design yourself!
     * 1-bike or 2-bike spectator courses too!
     * Normal direction, reverse direction -- take your pick! Up to 10
       laps!
     * Lots of action! Out-maneuver, out-class your opponents!

   DEVELOPMENT HISTORY
   Started by Rick Levine in 1981 as his follow-up project to PBA
   Bowling, Motocross was put on hold when Rick left Mattel. (Tired of
   commuting from Irvine to Hawthorne, Rick took a non-gaming job. Later,
   he went to work for Imagic, where he programmed the Intellivision
   games Microsurgeon and Truckin'.) Months later, biker Rick Koenig took
   a stab at completing the game. After several weeks, he got permission
   to scrap the existing code and begin from scratch. Only Rick Levine's
   basic concept and graphics were kept, with new animations by Joe
   Ferreira.

   Rick Koenig approached the game scientifically, writing routines to
   simulate all the movements of the cycles according to the laws of
   physics. The result is motorcycles that accelerate, skid and jump
   realistically.

   Although announced in Mattel catalogs in 1981 and 1982 as part of the
   Intellivision Sports Network, by the time the game was released in
   1983 the themed "networks" had been dropped. The Sports Network isn't
   mentioned on Motocross's final packaging.

   FUN FACT: Gravity is a factor in the motion routines. During testing,
   Rick made gravity adjustable to determine the best looking arc when
   jumping. Several unsuspecting programmers were invited to test the
   game, not knowing gravity had been set to zero. The first time their
   cycles hit a ramp, the cycles would sail up-up-and-away off the
   screen, while the programmers frantically tapped the controller discs,
   trying to make them come back down.

   FUN FACT: Rick was able to reuse his basic algorithms from Motocross
   several times: in Racing Destruction Set, a Commodore 64 game for
   Electronic Arts (produced by his old Mattel boss, Don Daglow), in
   Stadium Mud Buggies, an Intellivision game for INTV Corp., and in
   Monster Truck Rally, an NES game also for INTV.

     _________________________________________________________________

                          World Championship Baseball

   INTELLIVISION CARTRIDGE [INTV #5789]
   AKA Baseball II, All-Star Major League Baseball
   Credits and description are on the INTV RELEASES page (under
   construction).

     _________________________________________________________________

                                 Basketball II

   INTELLIVISION CARTRIDGE [UNFINISHED]
   Produced by APh Technology Consultants for Mattel Electronics

   DEVELOPMENT HISTORY
   During 1981, APh started work on Baseball II and Basketball II --
   one-player versions of the original games. These were not high
   priorities since the original versions continued to sell well. In
   1982, when the Keyboard Component was killed, Marketing wanted to
   produce a series of Super Sports cartridges for the ECS to help push
   that system, so work was halted on the non-ECS sports games.
   Baseball II was far enough along that, eventually, it was
   released. Basketball II, however, was abandoned (although it was
   briefly considered as an Intellivision III title).

     _________________________________________________________________


Space Network ³
ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÙ


                  INTELLIVISION SPACE ACTION NETWORK

   By the end of 1981, Intellivision had the reputation for the best
   sports titles and Atari had the reputation for the best arcade games.
   In 1982 the battle was over who had the best space cartridges. The
   movie Star Wars in 1977 had sparked a science fiction resurgence,
   which hit a peak in 1982 with the release of E.T.: The
   Extra-Terrestrial. Mattel Electronics turned to the same TV-commercial
   strategy they used to establish their sports titles: a side-by-side
   comparison of an Atari game with an Intellivision game, in this case
   Asteroids versus Star Strike. The strategy paid off; four of the
   five released Space Action Network games approached the 1,000,000 mark
   in sales, with the fifth, Space Hawk, reaching 500,000.

   Atari fought back with its highly publicized multi-million dollar
   purchase of the videogame rights to E.T. Atari used the anticipation
   for this cartridge to sell their 2600 console. Cleverly, Mattel
   countered by hiring E.T. star Henry Thomas to join spokesperson George
   Plimpton in Intellivision commercials. Mattel's lawyers, however, to
   avoid a lawsuit, didn't allow Thomas's connection to the movie, or to
   science fiction, or even his name to be mentioned in the commercials.
   (While the anticipation of the E.T. cartridge may have succeeded in
   selling Atari consoles, its actual release was the greatest flop in
   the videogame industry.)

   Surprisingly, given the success of the Space Action Network, Mattel
   put no space titles into production for the Intellivision during 1982
   or 1983 with the exception of the never-finished Target: Andromeda.

   All of the games on this page were released in Space Action Network
   dark blue boxes. A couple of these games were also released under the
   Sears brand name in different packaging.

     _________________________________________________________________

                                 Space Battle

   INTELLIVISION CARTRIDGE [#2612]
   Also released by Sears [#4975212]
   Produced by APh Technology Consultants for Mattel Electronics

   CATALOG DESCRIPTION
   The alien squadron is closing in on your Mother Ship. You're awesomely
   outnumbered, and they attack and attack...

   Flick on the situation map and analyze your position. Dispatch a
   fighter squadron toward the closest alien cluster.

   You're smarter, a little faster, and you're going to let these aliens
   know they've got a fight on their hands.

   Flick back to a cockpit close-up view. Here they come! Aim
   lasers...fire!

     * Computerized situation map
     * Close-up attack viewer
     * Computerized and manual battle modes

   PRODUCTION NOTE
   An M Network version of the game, called Space Attack, was released
   for the Atari 2600.

   PLAYING TIPS: From Intellivision Game Club News, Issue 2, Winter 1982
   (credited to "Hal, one of our creative programmers"):

   Strategy Mode (radar screen)
     * Fight your own fights -- when the computer fights for you, you
       will probably lose more ships than if you fought the battle
       yourself. Rotate through your squadrons if more than one is
       engaged.
     * Stagger dispatches -- if you carefully time your squadron
       dispatching, you may be able to complete the first battle before
       your second squadron engages.
     * Don't let the radar screen fool you -- make your dispatch
       decisions based on the actual distances from the aliens to your
       mother ship. The rectangular layout on the game screen may cause
       you to misjudge the distance.
     * Win the battle but don't lose the war -- the instant one of your
       squadrons defeats an alien squadron, dispatch your squadron to
       another alien group or return it to base. Don't waste valuable
       time by leaving a squadron drifting aimlessly in space.
     * Hit them where it hurts -- if an alien squadron penetrates your
       home base territory, send in one of your squadrons. Keep the alien
       squadron busy and they'll have less striking power to use against
       your home base.

   Battle Mode
     * Practice aiming -- lead the ships with your cursor for best
       results.
     * Keep moving -- after firing, it's not necessary to keep your
       cursor on target. Your lasers will blast the spot at which they
       were fired. Move on to a new target, and keep mobile to avoid
       enemy lasers.
     * Avoid target fixation -- keep switching back to the radar screen
       to track alien progress.

     _________________________________________________________________

                                    Arcade

   INTELLIVISION CARTRIDGE [UNFINISHED #3605]
   Produced by APh Technology Consultants for Mattel Electronics

   CATALOG DESCRIPTION
   Galaxian strategy! Hordes of oncoming aliens swoop down on your
   star-ship! You defend your position -- parrying, blasting, avoiding
   the torpedoes! Wave after wave of them march down upon you...will you
   save the star-base? Only your command of strategy can help you!

   PRODUCTION HISTORY
   Although included in early Intellivision catalogs, a prototype of this
   game was never demonstrated; it's not clear how much work was actually
   ever done on it. Designed to be a Galaxian clone, it was probably
   abandoned for fear of a lawsuit. (Possibly it was in development with
   the hope of obtaining the license, and abandoned when Mattel failed to
   get it.) While called Arcade in the catalogs, this was most likely a
   working title. (Triple Action was developed under the working
   titles 5-in-1 Arcade and 3-in-1 Arcade.)

     _________________________________________________________________

                                 Space Armada

   INTELLIVISION CARTRIDGE [#3759]
   Produced by APh Technology Consultants for Mattel Electronics

   CATALOG DESCRIPTION
   You're defending Planet Earth against the unrelenting attack of alien
   warlords.

   At first they throw their light brigades at you. If you're quick and
   careful, you should be able to elude their bombs, moving out of the
   way or taking refuge behind a bunker.

   But when you wipe out the first couple of brigades, they'll launch a
   more deadly attack, dropping faster, more lethal bombs. Clear the
   battlefield once more, and they'll resort to guided missiles and even
   more fiendish devices.

   You've got your hands full -- of excitement and aliens!

     * Two skill levels
     * Varied alien weaponry
     * Invisible targets
     * Super sound effects

   PRODUCTION HISTORY
   Space Armada is a clone of the arcade game Space Invaders. According
   to Mattel lawyers, the copyright of the original game hadn't been
   properly protected. Any other company could make their own version as
   long as they changed the name ("Space Invaders" is a trademark).

   Space Armada was the first Intellivision game to take advantage of
   sequencing GRAM to create the illusion of more than eight moving
   objects (sprites) onscreen at one time.

   PLAYING TIPS: From Intellivision Game Club News, Issue 3, Summer 1982:

     * Start to the right. Knock off vertical columns to delay the armada
       from advancing down another rank. The fewer columns left in the
       armada, the better your chances of clearing the screen as the
       armada approaches the bottom.
     * Hit the saucer. It's difficult but well worth it. Not only do you
       get points, a bunker will be rebuilt as well.
     * Don't get hit. Stay mobile or hide behind the bunkers. You'll need
       every "life" possible late in the game.
     * Remember the red spiral missiles don't need a direct hit to cause
       damage. If you're too close when the missile hits bottom, your
       base will be destroyed.
     * Outmaneuver the red homing missiles. Lead them into a bunker. They
       will crash and self-destruct. Or, lead them along to one side,
       quickly double-back underneath and fire.
     * Concentrate. Remember the structure of the invisible armadas. Many
       good players suffer early defeat because they forgot the presence
       of just one alien.

     _________________________________________________________________

                                  Astrosmash

   INTELLIVISION CARTRIDGE [#3605]
   Working titles: Rocks, Meteor! + Avalanche
   Design & Program: John Sohl

   CATALOG DESCRIPTION
   Spin. Blast. And drop into hyperspace to avoid a killer asteroid
   shower. Power on. Attack computer engaged. Fire a quick burst at the
   alien antagonists. Got 'em!

   Now take a deep breath and relax. But only for a fraction of a second,
   because more trouble is on the way.

   You're all alone in a hostile universe of tumbling asteroids and
   homicidal aliens. You've got the wits and the speed, but you're
   awesomely outnumbered.

   With a little practice, you may survive...

     * Battle aliens and tumbling asteroids
     * Unlimited scoring potential
     * Hyperspace feature

   PRODUCTION HISTORY
   Astrosmash started out as a clone of the arcade game Asteroids, called
   Meteor. The game wasn't very big, so John Sohl used the extra room in
   the cartridge to come up with a variation called Avalanche using the
   same graphics and sound effects. At the last minute, afraid of a
   lawsuit from Atari, the Mattel lawyers killed the Asteroids-like
   Meteor. Rather than risk introducing bugs by deleting code, John
   simply put a branch around the opening-screen menu straight into the
   Avalanche variation, which was released under the name Astrosmash.

   Astrosmash quickly became one of the most popular Intellivision games
   thanks in large part to a very simple technique John programmed in:
   like most arcade-style games, Astrosmash gets faster and harder at
   higher levels, but unlike most arcade-style games, as you start to
   lose lives, the game gets easier again. The game then is never too
   easy or too hard, making it extremely addictive and making it possible
   for even a beginner to play a single game for over an hour.

   The popularity of Astrosmash was such that late in 1982 it replaced
   Las Vegas Poker & Blackjack as the cartridge shipped with the
   Intellivision Master Component. By June 1983, the last date for which
   figures are available, 984,900 copies of Astrosmash had been shipped,
   making it the most widely distributed cartridge by any of the Blue Sky
   Rangers (trailing only the APh produced Las Vegas Poker & Blackjack
   and Major League Baseball cartridges). John Sohl was rewarded with
   a plaque from Mattel and a better offer from Activision, which he took
   (after finishing B-17 Bomber).

   An Aquarius version was also released, as was an M Network version
   called Astroblast for the Atari 2600. A musical adaptation, Melody
   Blaster, was released for the ECS Music Synthesizer. An obscene
   version, called...well, we can't tell you what it was called, was
   developed for in-house use only. The story of this version can be
   found in a TRON Solar Sailer FUN FACT.

   BUG: There's no check for the score overflowing -- beyond 9,999,999
   points, the scoring routine starts displaying negative numbers,
   letters, and other ASCII characters. (Ironically, the catalog
   description promises "Unlimited scoring potential.")

   BUG: John simply branched around the code for the Asteroids version of
   the game; the code is still in the cartridge. Verrrry rarely, when
   there's a glitch hitting RESET, the Asteroids version will show up on
   screen. (This would be a dandy Easter egg if it were intentional or
   reliably repeatable, but it's neither.)

   PLAYING TIPS: From Intellivision Game Club News, Issue 1, Fall 1981:

   Here is some extra ammunition from John P. Sohl, creator of
   Astrosmash. [Note: this issue was the only time that Intellivision
   programmers were publicly referred to by name until the inclusion of
   credits on cartridges late in 1983. The same issue mentions Mike
   Minkoff as the creator of Bowling.] Sohl says you'll be unbeatable
   if you follow three basic rules: don't get hit, shoot anything that
   moves and never take risks unless you have to.

   Sound easy? It is if you practice Sohl's special techniques for
   hitting your targets.

     * To hit rocks, fire two shots rapidly. The first will split the
       rock, the second will explode both smaller fragments. If you are
       threatened by a rock and a spinner, go for the spinner.
     * Shoot the fastest falling spinners first. Aim carefully; the extra
       moment you take aiming usually pays off with a hit on the first
       shot. Go for spinners at any cost -- if one reaches the ground,
       you've lost.
     * Guided missiles are easy to shoot, hard to evade so shoot them
       high on the screen before they give you trouble. If you miss
       they'll follow you around. The only way to get rid of them is to
       lure them off the edge of the screen and use the hyperspace to get
       away.
     * The UFO will appear when the score is over 20,000. It shoots
       torpedoes at your laser base whenever the base is when the shot is
       fired. So keep moving and you will avoid 90% of all UFO torpedoes.

   Precision aiming is important. To get the highest scores, Sohl says to
   leave the anti-fire on and steer with the directional wheel using the
   firing button to get off extra shots as you need them. Keep on
   shooting!

   FUN FACT: The unused Asteroids-version code was recycled in the game
   Space Hawk.

   FUN FACT: Late in 1981, Mattel held a series of local "Intellivision
   VideoChallenge Tournaments" in Washington D.C., Baltimore, New York,
   Philadelphia, Chicago and Los Angeles benefiting Variety Clubs
   International. Contestants competed for prizes (Grand Prize: an RCA
   projection TV) playing Major League Baseball, Auto Racing, and
   U.S. Ski Team Skiing. The publicity was so good, that Marketing
   took the idea national in 1982 with the "$100,000 Astrosmash
   Shootoff."

   From March until August 11, Intellivision owners were invited to send
   photographs of their TV screens showing their high score in
   Astrosmash. Just for entering, they would receive an Astrosmash
   Shootout patch, and it was announced that 16 regional high-scorers
   would be flown to Houston to compete for eight cash prizes.

   Over 13,000 people entered, and quickly it became obvious there was a
   problem. First, because of the scoring bug, many of the pictures
   showed scores made up of seemingly random ASCII characters. John Sohl
   had to review the photos and, with an ASCII table, decipher the actual
   scores. Second, it turned out that no one in Marketing realized that
   Astrosmash, like many Intellivision games, can be played at slower
   speeds simply by starting the game by pressing 1, 2, or 3 instead of
   the disc. (This is a feature programmed into the EXEC.) There was
   no way of telling who had legitimately obtained a high score and who
   had played at the easiest speed. There were reports of competitors who
   literally played for days at the slowest speed, pausing the game
   (pressing 1 and 9 simultaneously, also programmed into the EXEC) to
   sleep or go to school.

   Unable to decide who was legit and who wasn't, instead of the
   announced 16, Mattel Electronics wound up flying 73 entrants to
   Houston for an all-expense paid weekend, September 11 & 12, 1982.
   There, the entrants competed in 1 hour of timed play. 18-year-old
   Manuel Rodriguez of Stockton, California won the $25,000 top prize
   with a score of 835,180.

     _________________________________________________________________

                                  Space Hawk

   INTELLIVISION CARTRIDGE [#5161]
   Also released by Sears
   Design & Program: Bill Fisher, John Sohl
   Graphics & Sound: Bill Fisher

   CATALOG DESCRIPTION
   You're equipped with a jetpack for directional avoidance control, a
   blaster for protection and 5 force shields. If you get hit, you lose a
   shield. Not only that, you're sent into a space spin that could be
   disastrous. While you're regaining control, UFOs and comets scream
   past you. Of course, you can use hyperspace to get out of a
   super-tight spot. That'll put a few million light years between you
   and danger. But, watch out. You could wind up in an even hotter spot.
   If you want to find out how good you are, invite a friend over,
   compare scores.

     * One player game
     * As your score goes up, the game automatically becomes more
       challenging
     * Laser fire and maneuvering options add variety

   PRODUCTION HISTORY
   Most new programmers started their first day with a copy of a simple
   training game called Killer Tomatoes. They were expected to spend a
   few weeks playing with it and modifying it to get a feel for how the
   Intellivision system worked before being assigned to a real game.

   Bill Fisher, however, had a different training game. On his first day
   in June 1981 he was given John Sohl's original Asteroids version of
   Astrosmash. He was told to modify it into a game that would still
   be like Asteroids, but different enough that the Mattel lawyers would
   allow it to be released. Space Hawk was the result. (And while he was
   at it, he fixed the bug in displaying the score.)

   FUN FACT: While testing the game, Bill came across a bug: every now
   and then, the game would, seemingly at random, hyperspace you. He and
   his boss, Mike Minkoff, went over the code with a fine-tooth comb
   before realizing what the problem was: the Intellivision hand
   controllers encode button presses in such a way that an action (side)
   key pressed at the same time as particular directions on the disc will
   be interpreted instead as a numeric key being pressed. There was no
   software way around this; shooting while moving would occasionally be
   interpreted as pressing 9 -- the hyperspace button.

   After several days of puzzling over a solution, the bug was ultimately
   "fixed" by including the following note in the instruction manual:

   "Every once in a while, your space hunter will move near a 'black
   hole,' and the computer will automatically put him into HYPERSPACE.
   This will cost you the same number of points as if you had pressed the
   HYPERSPACE key yourself. On the other hand, it will save your hunter."

   This led to an axiom frequently heard around Mattel: If you document
   it, it's not a bug -- it's a feature. Anytime a game in development
   crashed -- no matter how badly or bizarrely -- witnesses would
   invariably turn to the frustrated programmer, shrug, and calmly say
   "document it."

     _________________________________________________________________

                                  Star Strike

   INTELLIVISION CARTRIDGE [#5136]
   Produced by APh Technology Consultants for Mattel Electronics

   CATALOG DESCRIPTION
   For action fast and furious, take command of a rocket-powered
   fighter-interceptor flying a few hundred feet off the deck. Your
   mission: attack and destroy alien silos defended by several squadrons
   of alien rocket-craft. You must react instantaneously. You are a few
   hundred feet above the terrain in a narrow canyon. That's where the
   aliens have dug in. Maneuvering room is severely limited. Meanwhile,
   earth is slowly coming into target position for the silos. Remember,
   you alone can save earth. Don't miss.

     * One player game
     * Six skill levels for greater challenge

   PRODUCTION HISTORY
   Inspired by the Death Star trench sequence from the movie Star Wars,
   Star Strike is actually a very simple game; most players quickly learn
   the timing of it to consistently win. But visually it was stunning,
   with a 3-D effect (accomplished by sequencing GRAM) not seen
   before in a home videogame. Heavily promoted, it was the top-selling
   Intellivision game of 1982, with nearly 800,000 units shipped that
   year.

   BUG: Hold down the left controller disk in a single position while
   simultaneously pressing one of the top action keys. The fighter will
   soon remain in a fixed position on the screen. Release the disk to
   unfreeze the fighter.

   PLAYING TIPS: From Intellivision Game Club News, Issue 3, Summer 1982:

     * Stay mobile. Keep moving up, down, left and right when the aliens
       are behind you. Don't give them a stationary target.
     * Practice firing at the aliens. Line up the alien ship between you
       and your laser's vanishing point.
     * Try shooting down both aliens. Doubling up on targets will give
       you a little extra time to align your ship for bombing before a
       new wave of aliens appear. You'll add extra points to your score.
     * Stay on the deck. It's much more difficult to bomb the alien's
       silos from a high altitude. Stay low and score higher.
     * Keep a mental scorecard. Keep track of alien silos destroyed.
       Don't risk damage by going after a "dead" silo.
     * Be aware of damage. Keep a careful record of your ship's
       capabilities. Damage reduces control. Don't ask your ship to do
       something it can't in emergency situations.

   FUN FACT: The Star Strike TV commercial became probably the most
   notorious of all videogame commercials of its era, with Mattel
   Electronics spokesperson George Plimpton bragging about "our most
   amazing visual effect ever: the total destruction of a planet!" while
   the earth is seen being blasted to pieces. Comedians, cartoonists and
   politicians all jumped on this as an example of the glorification of
   violence in videogames.


Children's Network ³
ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÙ

                     CHILDREN'S LEARNING NETWORK

   Intellivision was promised as an educational as well as an
   entertainment product, and one of the first four titles released,
   The Electric Company Math Fun reflected this. However, Mattel
   quickly saw where the money was -- sports and arcade titles -- and
   educational games were put on the back burner.

   Only two titles came out as part of the orange-boxed Children's
   Learning Network. No others were even in development. (Partly this was
   due to the belief that the Intellivision Keyboard Component was
   better suited to educational games.) Each of these games ultimately
   sold just under 150,000 copies -- low by Intellivision standards.

     _________________________________________________________________


                         The Electric Company Word Fun

   INTELLIVISION CARTRIDGE [#1122]
   Trademark used under license from Children's Television Workshop, Inc.
   AKA Word Fun
   Produced by APh Technology Consultants for Mattel Electronics

   CATALOG DESCRIPTION
   How those little monkeys love to learn! Watch them swing through the
   jungle, capturing letters with their tails and making words.

   Three great learning games. Find A Word has little learners weaving
   words in and out of each other. Word Hunt sends them into the jungle
   looking for missing letters.

   And Word Rocket has them blasting vowels into the sky to make words
   out of clouds of consonants. It's the fun and easy way to improve
   vocabulary skills.

     * Three fascinating word games
     * One or two players
     * Developed in conjunction with The Children's Television Workshop

   PRODUCTION NOTES
   Find A Word was renamed Crosswords between the printing of the
   catalogs and the release of the cartridge.

   The three games in the Word Fun cartridge were recycled in the
   Learning Fun II cartridge from INTV Corporation.

   BUG: The game won't work when plugged into an Intellivision II. A
   feature to keep early Coleco-produced Intellivision cartridges from
   working in the Intellivision II inadvertently keeps Word Fun from
   working also. Marketing didn't feel Word Fun was important enough to
   hold up release of Intellivision II to fix the problem.

     _________________________________________________________________

                         The Electric Company Math Fun

   INTELLIVISION CARTRIDGE [#2613]
   Trademark used under license from Children's Television Workshop, Inc.
   AKA Math Fun
   Produced by APh Technology Consultants for Mattel Electronics

   CATALOG DESCRIPTION
   Who would guess that learning basic arithmetic skills could be this
   much fun!

   To solve the math problems, two players race their clever gorillas
   along the river bank, ducking past obstructing animals.

   The math gets more challenging when the players are ready for it.
   Addition, subtraction, multiplication and division -- all are more fun
   with Math Fun.

     * Accomodates wide range of learning levels
     * One or two players
     * Developed in conjunction with The Children's Television Workshop

   PRODUCTION HISTORY
   Although it has a higher production number than Word Fun, Math Fun
   was released first -- it was one of the original four cartridges test
   marketed in 1979.

   Initially, the solutions for math problems had to be entered ones
   column first. For example, when subtracting 5 from 24, the solution,
   19, would have to be entered as 9, then 1. While this was designed to
   duplicate how people solve problems with pencil and paper, many
   customers complained; intuitively, they wanted to simply press in 1
   then 9. A running change was ordered so that later copies of the
   cartridge use this intuitive method of entry, instead.

   The Electric Company Math Fun was recycled as the game Math Master on
   the Learning Fun I cartridge from INTV Corporation.

     _________________________________________________________________

Gaming Network ³
ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÙ

                     INTELLIVISION ACTION NETWORK

   The Gaming Network featured "betting" games, with the word "bet"
   always in quotes or following the word "simulated" or "make-believe,"
   lest people think Mattel was promoting gambling.

   Gaming Network cartridges were released in green boxes. Several of
   these games were also released under the Sears brand name in different
   packaging.

     _________________________________________________________________

                              Las Vegas Roulette

   INTELLIVISION CARTRIDGE [#1118]
   Also released by Sears
   AKA Roulette
   Produced by APh Technology Consultants for Mattel Electronics

   CATALOG DESCRIPTION
   Can you parlay your pile of chips into a fortune? Do you dare risk it
   all on a single number that you just know is due to come up on the
   next spin of the wheel? Here's a great party game with all the sound
   and color of the big casino. Place your "bets"...all "bets" down? Then
   here goes the big wheel of fortune -- clickety-click-click -- and
   cross your fingers as the wheel slows and the ball bounces toward your
   lucky number.

     * Authentic roulette table layout
     * One or two players

     _________________________________________________________________

                                 Horse Racing

   INTELLIVISION CARTRIDGE [#1123]
   Also released by Sears
   Produced by APh Technology Consultants for Mattel Electronics

   CATALOG DESCRIPTION
   A great game of make-believe for up to 6 players. It's like spending a
   day at the races. Study the tout sheet. Pick a winner -- or a loser.
   The odds will change. Go for a long shot or play it safe. They're off
   and the excitement begins. Cheer your horse on. You could clean up --
   on paper. A fun party game.

     _________________________________________________________________

                          Las Vegas Poker & Blackjack

   INTELLIVISION CARTRIDGE [#2611]
   Also released by Sears
   AKA: Poker & Blackjack
   Produced by APh Technology Consultants for Mattel Electronics

   CATALOG DESCRIPTION
   From the shuffle of the cards...to the clinking of the coins...to the
   felt green of the gaming table...to the shifty eyes of the dealer,
   Intellivision has captured the flavor and the color of casino card
   games.

   Play poker! Five card stud or draw. Seven card stud. This dealer plays
   tough. He raises, drops, even bluffs. Play carefully because he'd like
   nothing better than to empty your wallet.

   When you've had enough poker, relax with a few hands of blackjack.
   Play real casino style and double down when you feel hot!

   FUN FACT: Because it came free with the Intellivision Master Component
   during 1980, 1981 and most of 1982, Las Vegas Poker & Blackjack had
   the most distribution of any Intellivision cartridge: over 1,900,000
   shipped by the end of 1982. When it was eventually replaced by
   Astrosmash as the free cartridge, distribution fell dramatically; only
   2,500 Las Vegas Poker & Blackjack cartridges were shipped in the first
   six months of 1983.

     _________________________________________________________________

                                Las Vegas Craps

   INTELLIVISION CARTRIDGE [UNRELEASED]
   AKA Craps
   Produced by APh Technology Consultants for Mattel Electronics

   PRODUCTION HISTORY
   APh completed (and was paid for) this adaptation of the dice game
   Craps, but it doesn't appear to have ever been announced or scheduled
   by Marketing for release.

     _________________________________________________________________

                                 Royal Dealer

   INTELLIVISION CARTRIDGE [#3758]
   Working titles: Cards, Card Fun
   Produced by APh Technology Consultants for Mattel Electronics

   CATALOG DESCRIPTION
   If you don't always have someone to play cards with and you're not
   challenged enough by Solitaire, this cartridge introduces you to three
   players and three different card games: Hearts, Rummy and Crazy
   Eights. Your computer deals the cards and keeps score. You can choose
   to play against one, two or three players.

     * One player game
     * Choose from three different games
     * One, two, or three computer opponents

   PRODUCTION HISTORY
   While a fairly minor release (36,000 initial shipment), Royal Dealer
   had a major effect on the development cycle inside Mattel Electronics.
   Long overdue from APh, when the game was finished it went straight
   into production with only brief playtesting by a few other
   programmers. When it was too late, it was discovered that the
   cartridge contained a major -- and easy to come across -- bug that
   crashed the game. Because of the low sales expected, Marketing decided
   to ship the cartridge anyway with an errata slip, but they were
   furious. The Quality Assurance department, which had frequently been
   bypassed on late games such as this one and B-17 Bomer, was
   immediately given life-or-death authority over all future games:
   nothing was allowed to be released until the official game testers
   Traci Roux and Dale Lynn had signed off on it. They were merciless:
   stomping on a game then gleefully showing the videotaped results to
   the programmer when they found a bug. But it paid off; to this day, we
   haven't seen any reports of bugs in games they approved.

   BUG: Recreating the bug discussed above was outlined in a September
   30, 1982 memo from game tester Traci Roux to Joel Crain, head of
   Quality Assurance:


The following steps lead to the problems with Royal Dealer.
They occur in all four games. You are rearranging your cards and have
a card out of the deck. Then one of the players lays down her final
card and that round ends. The new round starts and you hit the disk. The
card from the last hand appears. Depending on how you rearrange and
throw your cards, different errors can occur. (If you hit rearrange first,
the game will progress normally, and the errors never occur.) The errors
that occur are:

You can rearrange the blank cards that are displayed. If you
rearrange enough times, the program gets confused and the screen
blanks out. You have to hit reset to start over.

Sometimes when you lift up a card to rearrange, you see it where the card
was. This usually occurs if this is one card by itself. If you have to draw
15 cards and they are all in a row, it usually will not let you pass. The
result is that you have to hit reset to start over. In Rummy, if you win
the round the music plays and the card screen comes up. The screen doesn't
show "GIN" by your hand and a card shows up in your final hand that wasn't
there before. Results are that you can't continue to the next hand, and you
have to hit reset to start over. If a gap appears between your cards, you
cannot get to the cards on the left side of the gap. The gap will go away
if you can discard your cards on the right of the gap. If you need a heart,
for example, and you draw until you have 15 cards, you may have to pass. If
there is a heart on the left side of the gap, you cannot get to it, the
program sees the heart, and will not allow you to pass. The result is you
have to hit reset to start over.

   Because of this bug, the following errata slip was added to the
   packaging: "Please correct your instruction booklet on Page 2 to read:
   You can only rearrange your cards each time it is your turn before
   playing or discarding a card from your hand. Once you have played or
   discarded, you must wait until your next turn before rearranging your
   cards."

     _________________________________________________________________

Arcade Network ³
ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÙ

                            ARCADE NETWORK

   It was obvious that Mattel was at a disadvantage in doing arcade game
   conversions: Atari, through its coin-op division, created and owned
   many of the most famous arcade titles. Mattel had to go shopping at
   other arcade game companies, trying to license whatever popular games
   were left over.

   There was an alternative which many programmers and a number of
   Marketing people favored: create good, original arcade-type games for
   Intellivision, promote them, then license those titles to outside
   coin-op companies; the companies would get the benefit of Mattel's
   advertising, and Mattel would benefit from a line of Intellivision
   coin-op machines in the arcades. Thus was born the Arcade Network.

   However, while the first Arcade Network game, Vectron, was in
   development, Mattel Electronics signed a deal with Data East for the
   first option on their arcade games. Data East became, in effect,
   Mattel's coin-op division and Marketing lost interest in the idea of
   developing original arcade titles in-house. Aside from a big push in
   the Intellivision Game Club News (Issue 5, Spring 1983), Vectron
   was released with no promotion and no attempt was made at licensing it
   to outside companies. There was no second Arcade Network game.

   The Arcade Network box color was burgundy.

     _________________________________________________________________

                                Vectron

   INTELLIVISION CARTRIDGE [#5788]
   Working titles: Vectrix, Vortex
   Design, Program, Sound: Mark Urbaniec
   Graphics: Connie Goldman

   CATALOG DESCRIPTION
   Hungrees, G-spheres, splits, sweeps and prizums -- the nasties are out
   to stop you from building your energy bases. Use your Vectron to build
   the bases level by level to increase your score. Or, use Vectron to
   shoot down or stun the nasties with energy blasts. But don't run out
   of energy, the nasties are nibbling away at your score. One or two
   player action.

   PRODUCTION HISTORY
   Mark wanted to capture the speed and color of the arcade game Tempest
   in an Intellivision title. The challenge was that Tempsest used vector
   graphics, while the Intellivision used TV's standard raster graphics.
   To reflect that the game would have a vector graphics look and feel,
   Mark chose the name Vectrix. Unfortunately, late in the development of
   the game, the Vectrex Arcade System from General Consumer Electronics
   (later bought by Milton Bradley) was announced -- a self-contained
   home game system that used true vector graphics. Mattel briefly
   considered fighting for the name, then decided to let it go. The game
   was briefly titled Vortex before the final name -- Vectron -- was
   chosen.

   FUN FACT: Mark and Keith Robinson, who was programming TRON Solar
   Sailer at the same time Mark was programming Vectron, both disliked
   the built-in Intellivision font, and they both hated that the "at"
   sign (@) was used as a copyright symbol on the title screens. They
   developed custom fonts for their games and made a special point of
   including a true c-in-circle copyright symbol in the character sets.
   They proudly showed off their custom title screens to Management,
   pointing out that for the first time Intellivision games would have
   correct copyright symbols.

   Management vetoed their use. The argument: if there was ever a court
   fight over the legitimacy of the copyrights on the old games, Mattel
   could argue that the "at" sign should be accepted in context as a
   copyright symbol, since the Intellivision can't generate a true one.
   Ah, but Vectron and TRON Solar Sailer would show that the
   Intellivision could generate a true copyright symbol, thus
   jeopardizing the copyrights of all previous Intellivision games. Mark
   and Keith were ordered to use "at" signs, instead.

   Feeling that this was about the stupidest thing they had ever heard,
   Mark and Keith went directly to Roy Ekstrand, head of Mattel's legal
   department, and presented their case. His decision: Mattel could argue
   that technological advancements since the earlier games now made it
   possible to use correct copyright symbols, where previously it wasn't.
   It would be safe to use the real copyright symbols.

   Gabriel Baum, VP of Applications Software, was furious that Mark and
   Keith had gone over his head, and told them to "never do it again."
   Then he told them to use their real copyright symbols.

   They later wondered: Was it worth risking their jobs over something as
   trivial as having the correct copyright symbol on their title screens?
   Their conclusion: "Damn right it was."

   FUN FACT: According to the instruction book, if you beat the top
   level, #99, you will be rewarded with "a special little visual treat."
   The treat? Due to space constraints, there was only room for a message
   reading "Congratulations. You are very good." The difficulty increases
   so much, though, that it is impossible to beat level 99. Or at least,
   Mark hopes it is. "If I went through all that to see the 'special
   visual treat' and all I got was, 'You are very good,'" Mark notes,
   "I'd sure be pissed."

   EASTER EGG: With the right combination of maneuvers with the energy
   block, you can get Mark's name to appear on screen. Since Mattel
   forbid hiding names in games, Mark made sure that the combination was
   so complicated that no one would stumble across it by accident. Well,
   he did such a good job hiding it, that he can't quite remember anymore
   how to do it. He's trying to recreate the combination; we'll post it
   here as soon as he finds it.

Intellivoice Games ³
ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÙ

                        INTELLIVOICE CARTRIDGES

       Intellivoice was introduced with great fanfare in 1982, hitting
       the market with three titles: Space Spartans, Bomb Squad
       and B-17 Bomber. But while the Intellivoice and the games were
       well reviewed, they were not big sellers. By June 1983, only
       300,000 each of the voice unit and first games had been shipped
       (compared to over 3 million Intellivisions); most of these were
       still on store shelves. The fourth game, TRON Solar Sailer,
       received only 90,000 orders. The release of a planned
       International Intellivoice module was cancelled.
       In August 1983, the plug was pulled on Intellivoice altogether.
       Work continued on two titles, Space Shuttle and World
       Series Major League Baseball, where the voice would become an
       enhancement only; the rest were canceled. Space Shuttle was
       canceled later, leaving World Series Major League Baseball to
       become the fifth and final voice game released. The fact that it
       works with Intellivoice is mentioned only briefly on the back of
       the box.

       FUN FACT: The Major League Baseball cartridge uses the
       Intellivision's sound chip to generate a crude voice saying "Yer
       out!" Marketing ordered a stop to further use of the sound chip to
       synthesize voices, fearing it would hurt demand for the
       Intellivoice.

       CREDITS: All Intellivoice games had scripts by the Creative Media
       Department (Joey Silvian, Brad Geagley, Glenn Stello) to develop
       distinct personalities for the voices. Voices were recorded at
       Fred Jones Recording Services in Hollywood, directed by Joey
       Silvian. International voices were recorded at studios in France
       and Italy and smuggled back into the U.S. on tapes marked "blank"
       to avoid paying duty (really). Voice files were digitized, edited
       and optimized by the Voice Department (Ron Carlson, Patrick Jost,
       Deidre Cimarusti, Sandy Disner, Lynn [Liliedahl] Fordham, Irene
       Pfannkuch). All Intellivoice programs included voice routines
       written by Ron Surratt and Steve Roney.
       The following list includes all Intellivoice games on which
       programming was actually done. Games completed but never released
       are marked UNRELEASED; games canceled before completion are marked
       UNFINISHED.
         _____________________________________________________________

                                Space Spartans

       INTELLIVOICE CARTRIDGE [#3416]
       Design/Program/Graphics: Bill Fisher & Steve Roney, Mike Minkoff,
       Brian Dougherty
       Sound: Bill Fisher, Bill Goodrich
       Voice of the Computer: Keri Tombazian
       plus voice credits

       CATALOG DESCRIPTION
       You are the commander of a spaceship. Suddenly, your ship's under
       attack. "Shields destroyed, Battle Computer one-third down," the
       ship's computer warns. You've got to hold them off until you can
       hyperdrive to a Starbase for repairs. "Starbase Two under attack!"
       The aliens have you in their clutches -- "The battle is over."
       Four different voices, two screens.

       DEVELOPMENT HISTORY
       Space Spartans, the first Intellivoice game, was begun in mid-1981
       by Brian Dougherty, who only worked on it a short time before
       leaving to join the start-up company Imagic. Mike Minkoff took
       over the project and developed it further. When Mike was promoted
       to manager, he passed it off to the team of Bill Fisher and Steve
       Roney, who really defined the game and made it more than just
       Space Battle with voice.
       At the time the game was in development, all Intellivision
       cartridges were 4K in size. To accommodate the voice data, Space
       Spartans was the first to be given a seemingly generous 8K. This
       turned out to be woefully inadequate; dialogue had to be cut to a
       minimum, and the sampling rate was dropped to the point where it's
       difficult to distinguish the male voices from each other. Luckily,
       dropping these to a very mechanical sound added to the sci-fi feel
       of the game. Only the female computer voice was kept at a higher
       rate, since it adds a strong note of personality. (Check out a
       sample of her voice at the Blue Sky Rangers Souvenir Stand.)
       All the voice games that followed were allocated 12 or 16K; even
       the foreign versions of Space Spartans (Gli Spartani Dello
       Spazio, Les Spartiates De L'Espace and Spartana Aus Dem
       All) were given 12K each.
       Most of the sound effects were written by Bill Fisher, but Bill
       Goodrich contributed the explosions; this was fortunate, since it
       helped find a bug in Intellivision II. While playing Space
       Spartans on an Intellivision II, Bill Goodrich was distressed to
       discover his explosions sounded "thin." Comparing other released
       cartridges, he discovered similar loss of sound quality in the
       bubbles in Shark! Shark! It was too late to fix the bug in
       Intellivision II, so subsequent games were tested and reprogrammed
       to get around any sound problems.

       BUG: The level counter is not checked properly -- it allows you to
       reach one higher level than it's supposed to. On that "level," you
       can reposition the alien bases as if they were your own.
         _____________________________________________________________

                          Les Spartiates De L'Espace

       INTERNATIONAL INTELLIVOICE CARTRIDGE [UNRELEASED]
       AKA French Space Spartans
       Program: Steve Roney
       plus voice credits

       DESCRIPTION
       Space Spartans with a French title screen and voices.
       Gameplay, graphics and sound effects are unchanged (aside from a
       couple minor bug fixes: the level counter and an Intellivision II
       sound-problem work-around). Requires the International
       Intellivoice unit.

       DEVELOPMENT HISTORY
       Steve made the modifications to the Space Spartans code for all
       three foreign versions. The tricky part was that the syntax for
       how numbers above ten are phrased varies from language to
       language.
         _____________________________________________________________

                           Gli Spartani Dello Spazio

       INTERNATIONAL INTELLIVOICE CARTRIDGE [UNRELEASED]
       AKA Italian Space Spartans
       Program: Steve Roney
       plus voice credits

       DESCRIPTION
       Space Spartans with an Italian title screen and voices.
       Gameplay, graphics and sound effects are unchanged (aside from a
       couple minor bug fixes: the level counter and an Intellivision II
       sound-problem work-around). Requires the International
       Intellivoice unit.
       DEVELOPMENT HISTORY
       See Les Spartiates De L'Espace.
         _____________________________________________________________

                             Spartana Aus Dem All

       INTERNATIONAL INTELLIVOICE CARTRIDGE [UNRELEASED]
       AKA German Space Spartans
       Program: Steve Roney
       plus voice credits

       DESCRIPTION
       Space Spartans with a German title screen and voices.
       Gameplay, graphics and sound effects are unchanged (aside from a
       couple minor bug fixes: the level counter and an Intellivision II
       sound-problem work-around). Requires the International
       Intellivoice unit.

       DEVELOPMENT HISTORY
       See Les Spartiates De L'Espace.
         _____________________________________________________________

                               Bomb Squad

       INTELLIVOICE CARTRIDGE [#3883]
       Working titles: Voice Bomb, Juggernaut
       Design/Program: Gene Smith, Shatao Lin
       Graphics: Kai Tran
       Sound: Russ Lieblich
       Voice of Frank: Phil Proctor
       Voice of Boris: Peter Bergman
       plus voice credits

       CATALOG DESCRIPTION
       It's a race against time as you attempt to disarm the terrorist
       bomb before it destroys the city! The screen shows the bomb
       circuitry as voices heighten the tension. "Wrong part...they'll
       never do it in time...one minute till blast." Hurry, other lives
       besides your own hang in the balance. Three voices, three screens.
       FUN FACT: The working title Juggernaut came from the 1974 Richard
       Harris movie of the same name that was used for inspiration.
       FUN FACT: The voices of Frank and Boris were provided by Phil
       Proctor and Peter Bergman, two members of The Firesign Theatre,
       the popular comedy group responsible for 22 best-selling record
       albums. Phil Proctor and a third member of the group, Phil Austin,
       are heard in the game Bomb Squad.

       FUN FACT: INTV Corporation unloaded the leftover inventory of
       Bomb Squad cartridges to a distributor in Mexico, even though the
       Intellivoice was never sold in that country. Without an
       Intellivoice, the game is virtually unplayable.
       French, Italian and German translations of the dialog were
       recorded but never used.
         _____________________________________________________________

                              B- 17 Bomber

       INTELLIVOICE CARTRIDGE [#3884]
       Working titles: Air Traffic Controller, Flying Fortress
       Design: John Sohl & Bob Del Principe, Bill Fisher & Steve Roney
       Program: John Sohl, Bill Fisher & Steve Roney
       Graphics: Kai Tran, Peggi Decarli (map of Europe)
       Sound: Bill Fisher
       Voice of Pilot: Phil Proctor
       Voice of Bombadier: Phil Austin
       plus voice credits

       CATALOG DESCRIPTION
       World War II action at 12 o'clock high as you fly a bombing
       mission deep inside Fortress Europe. You select your targets and
       switch from cockpit view to bomb bay view. the closer you get to
       your target the more flak and enemy planes you encounter. "Target
       in sight," you switch back to the bomb bay view "Bombs Away."
       Three voices, three different screens.

       DEVELOPMENT HISTORY
       Despite published reports that this game came out of a
       brainstorming picnic in the park (TV Guide, June 19, 1982),
       John Sohl remembers it differently: The initial Intellivoice
       brainstorming session was held mid-1981 on the third floor of the
       main Mattel Toys building -- a floor with armed guards to keep
       spies from finding out Mattel's biggest secrets, such as what
       Barbie would be wearing next year. This session yielded three
       ideas that went into production: Space Spartans, Bomb
       Squad and Air Traffic Controller. John, fresh from Astrosmash,
       began work on Air Traffic Controller, although he wasn't
       enthusiastic about the concept: bringing a plane in for a landing
       based on feedback from the control tower. He was leaning toward
       using the alternate scenario developed for the game -- an oil
       tanker negotiating a foggy docking with feedback from the Harbor
       Master -- when Bob Del Principe, a graphics artist, came into his
       cubicle and suggested making the airplane a bomber on a mission
       over Europe. Now blowing stuff up was a concept John could get
       enthusiastic about! Within an hour, Air Traffic Controller turned
       into Flying Fortress.
       By early 1982, John, with graphics artist Kai Tran, had developed
       an impressive bombing run simulation with revolutionary
       Intellivision effects, but the cartridge was oversize and the
       gameplay was still to be defined. Steve Roney and Bill Fisher,
       just off Space Spartans, were assigned to the game, now called
       B-17 Bomber, full-time. John, Steve and Bill worked up to the last
       minute -- literally -- to finish it. Unfortunately, most of John's
       fancy features (such as a turret gunner who could rotate 360
       degrees) had to be cut in favor of gameplay. On April 23, 1982,
       two months overdue, on the day the program absolutely had to be
       shipped to the ROM factory in Arizona, programming frantically
       continued. (John recalls: "During the final week, and particularly
       the final day, I got the impression that everyone [in the
       department] was adding code or graphics to the game.") With less
       than an hour to go, they pronounced it finished (or, more
       accurately, "close enough"). An unsuspecting visitor to Mattel
       that day was Shanghaied, stuck in a cubicle and asked to try out
       the game. That 30 minutes of play was the extent of the game
       testing. The code was shipped, and everyone kept their fingers
       crossed that the bugs wouldn't be too bad. Luckily, they weren't,
       and B-17 Bomber was released to strong reviews.

       BUG: If your altitude is high enough, and you're hit with enough
       enemy fire, you can rack up so much damage before you hit the
       ground that you'll roll over the counter. Voilá! Instant repair!

       BUG: Dropping a bomb to the far left of the screen from just the
       right altitude will crash the game.

       BUG: Flying into flak features some great perspective animation;
       the rear view, however, doesn't look quite right. They ran out of
       time to debug it. By the way, they also ran out of room for a flak
       graphics picture. Instead, the program grabs some of the Executive
       ROM program code and graphically displays it. This random jumble
       of bits passes as flak.

       BUG: When the game starts, the bomber faces east. When you return
       from a mission, the bomber faces west. When you start the second
       mission, the bomber is still facing west, so you can easily end up
       half-way to Bermuda, trying to figure out how the English Channel
       got so wide and where the German fighters are.

       FUN FACT: The gauges screen was not intended to be in the game. It
       was a debugging tool, used by the programmers to check on the
       value of certain variables during the game. John liked it so much
       it became part of the finished product. But since this screen was
       never intended to be seen by the public, it wasn't coded to check
       for values overflowing, resulting in non-numeric characters
       showing up on the counters.

       FUN FACT: Early in the development of the game, John and Kai, just
       for fun, used Atari logos to mark targets on the map of Europe. No
       one noticed this when the marketing department displayed the
       unfinished game at the January 1982 Consumer Electronics Show. No
       one, that is, except the Atari legal team, who swooped into the
       Mattel booth and forced them to stop demonstrating the game.

       FUN FACT: One of the characters in the game has a pronounced
       Southern accent. A few customers, hearing the drawl
       "Buheee-Sevunteen Baaahmmmer" on the title screen, sent the
       cartridge back as defective. (The character, described in Joey
       Silvian's script as: "Southern accent, laid back, slow drawl even
       under fire, talks like sittin' in a cotton field on a sunny day
       watchin' the bees buzz," was voiced by Phil Austin, a member of
       The Firesign Theatre comedy group.)

       FUN FACT: B-17 Bomber was not included when foreign versions of
       the Intellivoice games were recorded. In a rare show of good
       taste, Marketing decided that a game in which the goal is to drop
       bombs on France, Germany and Italy would be inappropriate for the
       European market.

       FUN FACT: At least one programmer was strongly opposed to Mattel
       releasing the game at all. In the main hallway of the programming
       department one day, numerous copies of a flyer appeared
       "announcing" the "logical follow-up" to B-17 Bomber: a Viet Nam
       game called Napalm the Babies. The flyer described how well
       Intellivision graphics could render burning flesh and how
       realistically Intellivoice could reproduce children's screams.
       While the author of the flyer remained anonymous, it was widely
       believed to have been Rick Sinatra (Melody Blaster), whose
       quintessentially non-violent game Sailing had just been canceled
       for lack of action. Rick left the department shortly thereafter.
       (Gabriel Baum, VP of Applications Software, took revenge with the
       TV Guide profile, in which the upcoming release of B-17 Bomber
       was repeatedly hyped: he singled out Sailing as an example of a
       game that got killed for lack of a "decent visualization.")
       Rick, however, says don't look at him -- he didn't even know of
       the existence of the flyer until he read about it here on the
       website. Actually, he says, B-17 Bomber was one of his favorite
       games. So the mystery of the Napalm the Babies flyer continues.
         _____________________________________________________________

                           TRON Solar Sailer

       INTELLIVOICE CARTRIDGE [#5393]
       Working Titles: Solar Sailor, Voice Tron
       Based on the Disney motion picture TRON
       Design: Keith Robinson, Don Daglow
       Program: Keith Robinson, Gene Smith
       Graphics: Keith Robinson
       Music: Arranged by Andy Sells from the TRON themes by Wendy Carlos
       Sound: Mark Urbaniec
       Voice Script: Creative Media Department
       Speech Synthesis/Editing: Voice Department
       Voices: Cory Burton (Tron), Diane Pershing & Patti Glick (Yori),
       Brian Cummings (MCP), Joannie Gerber (Bit) and Fred Jones
       (mechanical voice)
       CATALOG DESCRIPTION
       A nightmare numbers game based on the Disney movie, TRON. Your
       challenge is to first seek out and then to decode the evil Master
       Control Program. The voice of TRON's girlfriend Yori helps you
       find the MCP as an electronic voice gives you the secret code to
       remember. The rest is up to you alone. "Energy low, We've been
       hit...end of line." Five different voices and two screens.

       DEVELOPMENT HISTORY
       TRON Solar Sailer was started by Don Daglow, but it was almost
       immediately put on hold when he was promoted to manager. A couple
       of months later, Keith Robinson picked up the project. As the
       drop-dead deadline of October 15, 1982 approached and the game was
       25% oversize, Gene Smith was assigned full time to optimize the
       code while Keith (to Gene's dismay) continued to add features. The
       day before deadline, they finished a version that both fit into
       12K and was pronounced bug-free by Traci Roux in Quality
       Assurance.
       French, Italian and German translations of the dialog were
       recorded but never used.
       FUN FACT: In early releases about the game, Marketing spelled it
       Solar Sailor, with an or. It took months to convince them that the
       proper spelling was Sailer. (A sailor is a person who sails, a
       sailer -- as in this case -- is something a person sails on.)

       FUN FACT: Keith wanted to use music from the film, but the Mattel
       legal department wasn't sure if our license with Disney included
       to rights to use Wendy Carlos's score; they said they'd check on
       it. They never did get back to Keith, so he just went ahead and
       used it. If you're reading this, Wendy, your check's in the mail.

       FUN FACT: While testing the game, Keith's boss Mike Minkoff kept
       getting access codes that ended in "69." Mike accused Keith
       several times of skewing the random numbers for an adolescent
       joke. Tired of being unfairly accused, Keith put the data stream
       01000101 (the binary representation of 69) in the game's opening
       demo screen. He then told Mike, "Look, if I was going to put a
       '69' in the game, I'd put it right on the title screen!" and
       waited to see how long it would take Mike to notice. He never did;
       the game went out that way. 01000101 appeared on the demo screen,
       in the advertising, on the back of the box and in the
       instructions. When Keith finally pointed it out, Mike said, "But
       that's 45!" Mike is such a dedicated programmer, he saw the number
       in hexadecimal (base 16); he never made the final calculation that
       45 (base 16) is 69 (base 10).

       FUN FACT: Keith and Gene felt that the digitized word "can't" in
       the MCP's line "I can't allow this" sounded...well...obscene, even
       though Deidre Cimarusti from the Voice Department insisted it had
       tested fine. To prove their point, Gene edited the voice file to
       isolate the word. They then altered the Space Spartans title
       screen so that it read and said "Mattel Electronics presents
       Space......" Well, you get the idea. This title screen became so
       popular among some programmers that a game was inevitable. They
       tacked the screen onto a version of Astrosmash with new graphics:
       the missile launcher, the missiles and the flying saucer were
       replaced with...c'mon, do we have to spell this out? (You can
       check out the word for yourself; it was left as-is in the game.)

       EASTER EGG: When you enter the access code on track one, append
       Keith's birthday -- 991955 -- to the code before pressing enter.
       He'll wish you luck before the next phase of the game.
         _____________________________________________________________

                                Magic Carousel

       INTELLIVOICE CARTRIDGE [#4161/UNRELEASED]
       AKA Funny Farm, Funny-Go-Round
       Design: Steve Ettinger & Joe Ferreira, Ron Surratt & Peggi Decarli
       Program/Sound/Music: Steve Ettinger
       Graphics: Joe Ferreira
       plus voice credits
       MARKETING DESCRIPTION
          + Identify animals on a carousel and follow instructions given
            throughout the game.
          + Score points by doing what the voices tell you:
               o Choose the correct carousel animal.
               o Play a piano.
               o Drink some milk.
               o Answer a telephone.
          + Learning game for children.
          + 2 different game screens.
          + 1 player Intellivoice game.
       DEVELOPMENT HISTORY
       Marketing specifically requested a children's educational game for
       the Intellivoice. Programmer Ron Surratt (Atari 2600 BurgerTime)
       and graphic artist Peggi Decarli (USCF Chess) drew up some initial
       concepts for the game (Ron's input was requested because he used
       to be a teacher), then Steve Ettinger was assigned as programmer.
       New-hire Joe Ferreira was added to train with Peggi as a graphics
       artist. Steve and Joe quickly became a strong design team, taking
       the concept from a barnyard to a carousel and making the game
       their own. By the time it was finished, however, Marketing decided
       that sales of Intellivoice units were too low to support such a
       "specialty" cartridge. Magic Carousel was shelved with the hope
       that a future increase in Intellivoice sales would justify the
       game's release. It never happened.
       Steve and Joe had proved themselves to be a formidable team, so
       they were chosen to design the top-secret experimental
       Intellivision game, Hover Force 3-D.

       EASTER EGG: Connect the twinkling stars above the carousel on the
       title screen to get SEE and JAF, Steve and Joe's initials.
         _____________________________________________________________

                                 Space Shuttle

       INTELLIVOICE CARTRIDGE [#4162/UNFINISHED]
       Design/Program: Steve Roney & Keith Robinson, Boyd Hays, Steve
       Montero
       Graphics: Joe Ferreira, Peggi Decarli
       Voice of Ground Control: Mayf Nutter
       Voice of On-Board Computer: Fred Jones
       Voice of Female Astronaut: Patti Dworken
       Voice of Male Astronaut (player): Tony Pope
       plus voice credits

       CATALOG DESCRIPTION
       "Columbia, this is Mission Control." All systems are go as you
       prepare your trek aboard the space shuttle. "We have ignition."
       You're at the controls from launch to landing as Mission Control
       keeps you informed. Repair satellites, refuel during orbits and
       perform other tasks. Seven different views and three voices help
       you accomplish your mission and make a safe landing. "Roger, out."

       DEVELOPMENT HISTORY
       Space Shuttle was started by Steve Montero, assisted by new-hire
       Boyd Hays. A short time later Steve left Mattel and Boyd took over
       the project as solo programmer. He and artist Joe Ferreira put
       together a launch sequence and cockpit view of orbiting, re-entry
       and landing, before Boyd also left. Steve Roney and Keith Robinson
       adopted the project, defining the actual gameplay of matching
       orbits with and capturing satellites. Joe did new cargo bay
       animations; Peggi Decarli designed a Mission Control map of the
       earth, showing the orbits.
       As the game was nearing completion, Intellivoice development was
       canceled. Steve and Keith saved the game temporarily by changing
       the voice to enhancement only, but ultimately Marketing felt Space
       Shuttle was too much simulation, not enough game, and canceled it.

       FUN FACT: Joey Silvian, who directed the voice recordings, was
       sometimes a bit obsessive about capturing just the right sound and
       personality. For the voice of Ground Control, he insisted on
       flying in an actor from Houston. During the recording session at
       Fred Jones's studio on Sunset Blvd. in Hollywood, the actor kept
       talking about Pink's -- a famous hot dog stand also in Hollywood.
       He went on and on about the fantastic chili dogs he had there last
       time he was in town. Finally, Joey turned to Fred and said "Can
       you get this guy a Pink's chili dog so we can get to work?" "Sure
       thing," Fred replied, picking up the phone. Joey had a hard time
       explaining when Fred Jones's bill arrived and it included not only
       a charge for six Pink's chili dogs, but for the limousine and
       driver Fred had hired to chauffeur the dogs to the studio.

       FUN FACT: Midway through development, Activision released an Atari
       2600 game called Space Shuttle -- A Journey Into Space. A
       brainstorming session was held to come up with a new name for our
       game. No new name was decided on, but the list that came out of
       the meeting gives some indication of just how these brainstorming
       sessions tended to go:
          + Earth Orbiter
          + Shuttle Orbiter
          + Orbitrak
          + Shuttle Mission
          + Mission Orbit
          + Open and Shuttle
          + StratoRover
          + Mission Control
          + Shuttle Pilot
          + Shuttle Commander
          + Star Pilot
          + Shuttle Off to Buffalo
          + Shuttle Diplomacy
          + In Space You're Asked
          + Shuttle Cock
          + Take This Satellite and Shuttle It
          + BullShuttle
         _____________________________________________________________

                                    Convoy

       INTELLIVOICE CARTRIDGE [#4163/UNFINISHED]
       Design/Program: Vladimir Hrycenko
       plus voice credits

       MARKETING DESCRIPTION
       Player controls an "18-wheeler" rig on a cross-country journey.
       Player receives instructions over his CB radio with regard to
       deliveries and road conditions. Player must successfully complete
       all assignments. One player game.

       DEVELOPMENT HISTORY
       Little progress had been made on Convoy before the designer,
       Vladimir Hrycenko, left Mattel. No one was excited enough about
       the project to take it over, and it went into permanent limbo.
         _____________________________________________________________

                                     Quest

       INTELLIVOICE CARTRIDGE [#4463/UNFINISHED]
       AKA Voice D&D
       Design/Program/Sound: Bill Goodrich
       Graphics: Monique Lujan-Bakerink, Eric Wels, Connie Goldman
       plus voice credits

       DESCRIPTION
       A medievel fantasy role-playing game, with the voice of the
       Dungeon Master sending characters on a series of quests.

       DEVELOPMENT HISTORY
       Bill Goodrich, a Dungeons and Dragons aficionado, set out to
       design a cartridge that would truly capture D&D gameplay.
       Unfortunately, development kept being postponed so that Bill could
       program sound effects and music for higher priority games, such as
       BurgerTime. Quest was only half- complete when Intellivoice was
       canceled. Although never far enough along for licensing talks to
       begin, it was generally assumed that Quest would be one of our
       official Advanced Dungeons and Dragons titles.
         _____________________________________________________________

                   World Series Major League Baseball

       ECS CARTRIDGE [#4537]
       Voice enhanced. Credits and description are on the ECS GAMES page
       (under construction).
         _____________________________________________________________

                               Woody Woodpecker

       INTELLIVOICE CARTRIDGE [#4551/UNFINISHED]
       Based on the Walter Lantz cartoon characters
       Design/Program: Karen (Tanouye) McConathy
       Graphics: Monique Lujan-Bakerink
       Voice of Woody Woodpecker: Gracie Lantz
       plus voice credits

       DESCRIPTION
       Buzz Buzzard has kidnapped baby animals from the forest and hidden
       them in his house. Woody must peck his ways through the walls to
       rescue them.

       DEVELOPMENT HISTORY
       Originally, Karen McConathy used the Mad Magazine cartoon "Spy vs.
       Spy" as her inspiration for the gameplay: Woody Woodpecker and
       Buzz Buzzard battling through Woody's treehouse using increasingly
       bizarre and complicated weapons against each other. Early in the
       game's development, however, a real Spy vs. Spy game was announced
       from another company. Marketing directed the game be changed to a
       voice Kool-Aid Man game, only with Woody. Midway through
       development of the revamped game, Intellivoice was canceled.

       FUN FACT: The original cartoon voice of Woody Woodpecker, Gracie
       Lantz, recorded new dialog especially for this game.


